中国的人权状况
Human Rights in China 

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China

一九九一年十一月·北京
November 1991, Beijing


目录
Contents 

前言 
Preface
    
生存权是中国人民长期争取的首要人权
The Right to Subsistence  the Foremost Human Right the Chinese People Long Fight for
    
中国人民获得了广泛的政治权利
The Chinese People Have Gained Extensive Political Rights 
    
公民享有经济、文化和社会权利
Citizens Enjoy Economic, Cultural and Social Rights
    
中国司法中的人权保障
Guarantee of Human Rights in China's Judicial Work
    
劳动权利的保障
Guarantee of the Right to Work 
    
公民享有宗教信仰自由
Citizens Enjoy Freedom of Religious Belief 
    
少数民族的权利保障
Guarantee of the Rights of the Minority Nationalities 
   
计划生育与人权保护
Family Planning and Protection of Human Rights 
    
残疾人的人权保障
Guarantee of Human Rights for the Disabled 
    
积极参与国际人权活动
Active Participation in International Human Rights Activities
 

前言
Preface

享有充分的人权，是长期以来人类追求的理想。
It has been a long-cherished ideal of mankind to enjoy human rights in the full sense of the term.

从第一次提出“人权”这个伟大的名词后，多少世纪以来，各国人民为争取人权作出了不懈的努力，取得了重大的成果。
Since this great term  human rights  was coined centuries ago, people of all nations have achieved great results in their unremitting struggle for human rights.

但是，就世界范围来说，现代社会还远没有能使人们达到享有充分的人权这一崇高的目标。
However, on a global scale, modern society has fallen far short of the lofty goal of securing the full range of human rights for people the world over. 

这也就是为什么无数仁人志士仍矢志不渝地要为此而努力奋斗的原因。
And this is why numerous people with lofty ideals are still working determinedly for this cause.

在旧中国，长期处于帝国主义、封建主义、官僚资本主义压迫之下，广大人民群众没有人权可言。
Under long years of oppression by the "three big mountains" -- imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism -- people in old China did not have any human rights to speak of. 

深受其苦的中国人民，一百多年来，一直把推翻“三座大山”的压迫，争得人权作为自己的目标，为此前赴后继，不惜流血牺牲，进行了长期的艰苦卓绝的斗争。
Suffering bitterly from this, the Chinese people fought for more than a century, defying death and personal sacrifices and advancing wave upon wave, in an arduous struggle to overthrow the "three big mountains" and gain their human rights. 

中华人民共和国成立后，中国的人权状况得到了根本的改变。
The situation in respect to human rights in China took a basic turn for the better after the founding of the People's Republic of China.

中国政府和中国人民十分珍惜这一来之不易的胜利成果，为维护人权和不断改善人权状况不遗余力，并取得了显著成绩。
Greatly treasuring this hard-won achievement, the Chinese government and people have spared no effort to safeguard human rights and steadily improve their human rights situation, and have achieved remarkable results.

世界上真正了解中国情况和不存偏见的人士，对此都给予充分肯定和公正评价。
This has won full confirmation and fair appraisal from all people who have a real understanding of Chinese conditions and who are not prejudiced.

当前，人权已成为国际社会普遍关心的重大问题之一。
The issue of human rights has become one of great significance and common concern in the world community. 

联合国通过的有关人权的宣言和一些公约，受到许多国家的拥护和尊重。
The series of declarations and conventions adopted by the United Nations have won the support and respect of many countries. 

中国政府对《世界人权宣言》也给予了高度的评价，认为它“作为第一个人权问题的国际文件，为国际人权领域的实践奠定了基础”。
The Chinese government has also highly appraised the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, considering it the first international human rights document that has laid the foundation for the practice of human rights in the world arena.

但是，人权状况的发展受到各国历史、社会、经济、文化等条件的制约，是一个历史的发展过程。
However, the evolution of the situation in regard to human rights is circumscribed by the historical, social, economic and cultural conditions of various nations, and involves a process of historical development.

由于各国的历史背景、社会制度、文化传统、经济发展的状况有巨大差异，因而对人权的认识往往并不一致，对人权的实施也各有不同。
Owing to tremendous differences in historical background, social system, cultural tradition and economic development, countries differ in their understanding and practice of human rights. 

对于联合国通过的一些公约，各国基于本国的情况，态度也不尽一致。
From their different situations, they have taken different attitudes towards the relevant UN conventions. 

人权问题虽然有其国际性的一面，但主要是一个国家主权范围内的问题。
Despite its international aspect, the issue of human rights falls by and large within the sovereignty of each country.

因此，观察一个国家的人权状况，不能割断该国的历史，不能脱离该国的国情；衡量一个国家的人权状况，不能按一个模式或某个国家和区域的情况来套。
Therefore, a country's human rights situation should not be judged in total disregard of its history and national conditions, nor can it be evaluated according to a preconceived model or the conditions of another country or region.

这是从实际出发，实事求是的态度。
Such is the practical attitude, the attitude of seeking truth from facts.

中国人民从自己的历史和国情出发，根据长时期实践的经验，对人权问题形成了自己的观点，并制定了相应的法律和政策。
From their own historical conditions, the realities of their own country and their long practical experience, the Chinese people have derived their own viewpoints on the human rights issue and formulated relevant laws and policies.

《中华人民共和国宪法》规定，中华人民共和国的一切权力属于人民。
It is stipulated in the Constitution of the People's Republic of China that all power in the People's Republic of China belongs to the people.

中国的人权具有三个显著的特点：
Chinese human rights have three salient characteristics. 

一是广泛性。
First, extensiveness.

享受人权的主体不是少数人，也不是某些阶级和阶层的一部分人，而是全体中国公民。
It is not a minority of the people or part of a class or social stratum but the entire Chinese citizenry who constitutes the subject enjoying human rights.

中国公民所享受的人权范围是广泛的，不仅包括生存权、人身权和政治权利，而且包括经济、文化、社会等各方面的权利。
The human rights enjoyed by the Chinese citizenry encompass an extensive scope, including not only survival, personal and political rights, but also economic, cultural and social rights.

国家不仅十分注重保障个人人权，而且注重维护集体人权。
The state pays full attention to safeguarding both individual and collectivrights. 

二是公平性。
Second, equality.

中国实行社会主义制度，消灭了剥削制度和剥削阶级，各项公民权利不受金钱和财产状况以及民族、种族、性别、职业、家庭、出身、宗教信仰、教育程度、居住期限的限制，为全社会的公民平等地享有。
China has adopted the socialist system after abolishing the system of exploitation and eliminating the exploiting classes. The Chinese citizenry enjoys all civic rights equally irrespective of the money and property status as well as of nationality, race, sex, occupation, family background, religion, level of education and duration of residence. 

三是真实性。
Third, authenticity.

国家为人权的实现从制度上、法律上、物质上给予保障。
The state provides guarantees in terms of system, laws and material means for the realization of human rights.

宪法和法律中规定的各种公民权利，同人们在现实生活中所享受的权利是一致的。
The various civic rights prescribed in the Constitution and other state laws are in accord with what people enjoy in real life.

中国的人权立法和政策，受到全国各民族各阶层人民和各党派、各团体以及社会各界的拥护和支持。
China's human rights legislation and policies are endorsed and supported by the people of all nationalities and social strata and by all the political parties, social organizations and all walks of life.

中国是发展中国家，在维护和发展人权的实践中，也曾发生过种种挫折。
As a developing country, China has suffered from setbacks while safeguarding and developing human rights.

现在，虽然在维护和促进人权上已取得了巨大的成就，但是还存在许多有待完善的地方。
Although much has been achieved in this regard, there is still much room for improvement.

继续促进人权的发展，努力达到中国社会主义所要求的实现充分人权的崇高目标，仍然是中国人民和政府的一项长期的历史任务。
It remains a long-term historical task for the Chinese people and government to continue to promote human rights and strive for the noble goal of full implementation of human rights as required by China's socialism.

现将中国有关人权的基本立场和实践扼要地作一介绍，以有助于国际社会正确地了解中国的人权状况。
In order to help the international community understand the human rights situation as it is in China, we present the following brief account of China's basic position on and practice of human rights.

生存权是中国人民长期争取的首要人权
The Right to Subsistence--The Foremost Human Right the Chinese People Long Fight for

对于一个国家和民族来说，人权首先是人民的生存权。没有生存权，其他一切人权均无从谈起。这是最简单的道理。
It is a simple truth that, for any country or nation, the right to subsistence is the most important of all human rights, without which the other rights are out of the question. 

《世界人权宣言》确认，人人有权享有生命、自由和人身安全。
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights affirms that everyone has the right to life, liberty and the security of person.

在旧中国，由于帝国主义的侵略，封建主义和官僚资本主义的压迫，人民的生命毫无保障，因战乱饥寒而死者不计其数。
In old China, aggression by imperialism and oppression by feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism deprived the people of all guarantee for their lives, and an uncountable number of them perished in war and famine.

争取生存权利历史地成为中国人民必须首先要解决的人权问题。
To solve their human rights problems, the first thing for the Chinese people to do is, for historical reasons, to secure the right to subsistence.

国家不能独立，人民的生命就没有保障。
Without national independence, there would be no guarantee for the people's lives. 

危害中国人民生存的，首先是帝国主义的侵略。因此，争取生存权首先要争取国家独立权。
When imperialist aggression became the major threat to their lives, the Chinese people had to win national independence before they could gain the right to subsistence. 

自1840年鸦片战争以后，中国一步一步地由一个封建大国沦为半殖民地半封建的国家。
After the Opium War of 1840, China, hitherto a big feudal kingdom, was gradually turned into a semi-colonial, semi-feudal country.

从1840年到1949年的110年间，英、法、日、美、俄等帝国主义列强先后对中国发动过大小数百次侵略战争，给中国人民的生命财产造成了不可估量的损失。
During the 110 years from 1840 to 1949, the British, French, Japanese, US and Russian imperialist powers waged hundreds of wars on varying scales against China, causing immeasurable losses to the lives and property of the Chinese people.

帝国主义者在历次侵略战争中，大规模地屠杀中国人民。
The imperialists massacred Chinese people in untold numbers during their aggressive wars.

1900年八国联军烧杀抢掠，将5万多人的塘沽镇变成空无一人的废墟，使拥有100万人的天津在烧杀之后仅存10万人，进入北京后，杀人不计其数，仅庄王府一处就杀死1700多人。
In 1900, the troops of the Eight Allied Powers -- Germany, Japan, Britain, Russia, France, the United States, Italy and Austria -- killed, burned and looted, razing Tanggu, a town of 50,000 residents, to utter ruins, reducing Tianjin's population from one million to 100,000, killing countless people when they entered Beijing, where more than 1,700 were slaughtered at Zhuangwangfu alone.

在1937年开始的日本帝国主义的全面侵华战争中，2100余万人被打死打伤，1000余万人被残害致死。
During Japan's full-scale invasion of China which began in 1937, more than 21 million people were killed or wounded and 10 million people mutilated to death.

其中，在1937年12月13日后的6个星期内，日本侵略军在南京就杀害了30万人。
In the six weeks beginning from December 13, 1937, the Japanese invaders killed 300,000 people in Nanjing.

帝国主义者大肆贩卖和虐杀华工，使旧中国无数生灵惨遭涂炭。
The imperialists sold, maltreated and caused the death of numerous Chinese laborers, plunging countless people in old China into an abyss of misery. 

据不完全统计，从十九世纪中叶到二十世纪二十年代，被贩卖到世界各地的华工多达1200万人。
According to incomplete statistics, more than 12 million indentured Chinese laborers were sold to various parts of the world from the mid-19th century through the 1920s. 

这些被绑架、被欺骗去的华工囚禁在“猪仔馆”，被烙上贩卖目的地的字号。
Coaxed and abducted, these laborers were thrown into lockups, known as "pigsties," where they were branded with the names of their would-be destinations.

1852—1858年间，仅汕头一地“猪仔馆”中的4万华工，就有8000多人被折磨致死。
During the 1852-58 period, 40,000 people were put in such "pigsties" in Shantou alone, and more than 8,000 of them were done to death there.

列强在中国各地开办的工程和矿山中，肆意虐杀华工的记录骇人听闻。
Equally horrifying was the death toll of ill-treated laborers in factories and mines run by imperialists across China.

日本帝国主义侵华期间，仅东北地区就有不下200万劳工被折磨致死。
During the Japanese occupation, no less than 2 million laborers perished from maltreatment and exhaustion in Northeast China.

华工被迫害致死后，被扔进山沟或乱石坑。
Once the laborers died, their remains were thrown into mountain gullies or pits dug into bare hillsides. 

现已发现的这种“万人坑”就有80多处，埋有劳工尸骨70多万具。
So far more than 80 such massive pits have been found, with over 700,000 skeletons of the victims in them.

帝国主义在中国实行殖民统治，使中国人民备受凌辱，毫无人格尊严可言。
Under the imperialists' colonial rule, the Chinese people had their fill of humiliation and there was no personal dignity to speak of.

那时，外国侵略者享有不受中国法律管辖的“治外法权”。
The foreign aggressors enjoyed "extraterritoriality" in those days. 

1946年12月24日，北平发生美国士兵皮尔逊强奸北京大学女生沈崇的暴行，激起全国人民的极大愤慨，但是，罪犯却由美国单方面处理，被宣布无罪释放。
On December 24, 1946 Peking University student Shen Chong was raped by William Pierson, an American GI, but, to the great indignation of the Chinese people, the criminal, handled unilaterally by the American side, was acquitted and released.
列强在中国设立的“租界”，拥有行政、立法、司法、警察和财政大权，成为完全独立于中国的行政和法律制度之外的“国中之国”。
Imperialist powers exercised administrative, legislative, judicial, police and financial powers in the "concessions" they had set up in China, turning them into "states within a state" that were thoroughly independent of the Chinese administrative and legal systems.
1885年，外国侵略者甚至在上海法租界公园门口公然竖起“华人与狗不得入内”的牌子，肆无忌惮地侮辱中国人的人格。
In 1885, foreign aggressors put up a signboard at the entrance of a park in the French concession in a blatant insult to the Chinese people, it read, "Chinese and dogs not admitted."

帝国主义强迫中国签订了1100多个不平等条约，对中国的财富进行了大规模的疯狂掠夺。
Forcing more than 1,100 unequal treaties on China, the imperialists plundered Chinese wealth on a large scale. 
据统计，近百年来，外国侵略者通过这些不平等条约掠去战争赔款和其他款项达白银1000亿两。
Statistics show that, by way of these unequal treaties, the foreign aggressors made away with more than 100 billion taels of silver as war indemnities and other payments in the past century. 
其中《南京条约》、《马关条约》、《辛丑条约》等8个不平等条约就勒索赔款19.53亿两白银，相当于清政府1901年收入的16倍。
Through the Sino-British Treaty of Nanking, the Sino-Japanese Treaty of Shimonoseki, the International Protocol of 1901 and five other such treaties alone, 1,953 million taels of silver in indemnity were extorted, 16 times the 1901 revenue of the Qing government.
而日本仅通过《马关条约》勒索的赔款2.3亿两白银，就相当于当时日本国家财政四年半的收入。
The Treaty of Shimonoseki alone earned Japan 230 million taels of silver in extortion money, about four and a half times its annual national revenue. 
侵略者在战争中的破坏和抢劫造成的损失，更是难以估算。
The losses resulting from the destruction and looting by the invaders in wars against China were even more incalculable.
日本全面侵华战争期间(1937—1945年)，中国有930余座城市被占领，直接经济损失达620亿美元，间接经济损失过5000亿美元。
During Japan's full-scale war of aggression against China (1937-45), 930 Chinese cities were occupied, causing US$62 billion in direct losses and US$500 billion in indirect losses. 
国家主权丧失，社会财富遭洗劫，使中国人民失去了最起码的生存条件。
With their state sovereignty impaired and their social wealth plundered or destroyed, the Chinese people were deprived of the basic conditions for survival.

面对国家主权的沦丧和人民生命的浩劫，中国人民为救亡图存，争取国家独立，同外国侵略者进行了一个多世纪不屈挠的斗争。
In face of the crumbling state sovereignty and the calamities wrought upon their lives, for over a century the Chinese people fought the foreign aggressors in an indomitable struggle for national salvation and independence.
在这期间，中国爆发了太平天国运动、义和团运动以及推翻了封建清王朝的辛亥革命。
The Taiping Heavenly Kingdom Movement, the Boxers Movement and the Revolution of 1911 which overthrew the Qing Dynasty broke out during this period.
这些革命运动虽然沉重地打击了帝国主义在中国的势力，但终究没有能使中国摆脱半殖民地的地位。
These revolutionary movements dealt heavy blows to imperialist influences in China, but they failed to deliver the nation from semi-colonialism.
直到中国共产党领导全国人民推翻了国民党的反动统治，建立了中华人民共和国之后，这种状况才发生根本的变化。
A fundamental change took place only after the Chinese people, under the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party, overthrew the Kuomintang reactionary rule and founded the People's Republic of China.
中国共产党自1921年诞生后，就在政治纲领中明确地提出，“推翻国际帝国主义的压迫，达到中华民族的完全独立”，“打倒军阀，统一中国为真正民主共和国”，并领导人民进行了艰苦卓绝的斗争，取得了民族民主革命的胜利。
After its birth in 1921, the Communist Party of China set the clear-cut goal in its political program to "overthrow the oppression by international imperialism and achieve the complete independence of the Chinese nation" and to "overthrow the warlords and unite China into a real democratic republic"; it led the people in an arduous struggle culminating in victory in the national democratic revolution.

中华人民共和国的建立，在中国大陆上铲除了帝国主义、封建主义和官僚资本主义势力，结束了中国一百多年来任人宰割、受尽欺凌的屈辱历史和长期战乱、一盘散沙的动荡局面，实现了人民梦寐以求的国家独立和统一。
The founding of the People's Republic of China eradicated the forces of imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism in the Chinese mainland, put an end to the nation's history of dismemberment, oppression and humiliation at the hands of alien powers for well over a century and to long years of turbulence characterized by incessant war and social disunity, and realized the people's cherished dream of national independence and unification. 
占人类总数近四分之一的中华民族再也不是侵略者可以任意屠杀侮辱的民族，中国人民以国家主人的姿态站立起来，第一次真正享有了应有的人格尊严，赢得了全世界的尊敬。
The Chinese nation, which makes up one-fourth of the world's population, is no longer one that the aggressors could kill and insult at will. The Chinese people have stood up as the masters of their own country; for the first time they have won real human dignity and the respect of the whole world.
中国人民的生命安全从此获得了根本保障。
The Chinese people have won the basic guarantee for their life and security.

国家的独立虽然使中国人民的生命不再遭受外国侵略者的蹂躏，但是，还必须在此基础上使人民享有基本的生活保障，才能真正解决生存权问题。
National independence has protected the Chinese people from being trodden under the heels of foreign invaders. However, the problem of the people's right to subsistence can be truly solved only when their basic means of livelihood are guaranteed.

吃饱穿暖，这是长期陷于饥寒交迫困境的中国人民的最低要求。
To eat their fill and dress warmly were the fundamental demand of the Chinese people who had long suffered cold and hunger.
旧中国的历代政府不仅没有能解决这一问题，反而加重了人民的灾难。
Far from meeting this demand, successive regimes in old China brought even more disasters to the people.
在旧中国，只占农村人口10%的地主和富农占有70%的土地，而占农村人口70%的贫雇农却只占有10%的土地；
In those days, landlords and rich peasants who accounted for 10 percent of the rural population held 70 percent of the land, while the poor peasants and farm laborers who accounted for 70 percent of the rural population owned only 10 percent of the land.
占人口极少数的官僚买办资产阶级垄断着80%的工业资本，操纵着全国的经济命脉。
The bureaucrat-comprador bourgeoisie who accounted for only a small fraction of the population monopolized 80 percent of the industrial capital and controlled the economic lifelines of the country. 
中国人民遭受着地租、赋税、高利贷和工商资本的层层盘剥，其所受的剥削和贫困的程度是世界上罕见的。
The Chinese people were repeatedly exploited by land rent, taxes, usury and industrial and commercial capital. The exploitation and poverty they suffered were of a degree rarely seen in other parts of the world.
据统计，1932年，仅苛捐杂税的名目就多达1656种，捐额约占农民收获量的60%至90%。
According to 1932 statistics, the Chinese peasants were subjected to 1,656 kinds of exorbitant taxes and levies, which took away 60-90 percent of their harvests. 
加上反动政府在政治上腐败无能，丧权辱国，充当帝国主义的统治工具，大小军阀割据，长期战乱不已，使人民灾难深重，生存维艰。
The people's miseries were exacerbated and their lives made all the harsher by the reactionary governments who, politically corrupt and impotent, surrendered China's sovereign rights under humiliating terms and served as tools of foreign imperialist rule, and by the separatist regime of warlords who were embroiled in endless wars. 
据估算，旧中国有80%的人长期处于饥饿、半饥饿状态，几乎每年都有几万到几十万人因饥饿而死。
It was estimated that 80 percent of the populace in old China suffered to varying degrees of starvation and tens of thousands -- hundreds of thousands in some cases -- died of it every year.
一遇自然灾害，更是饿殍遍野。
A major natural disaster invariably left the land strewn with corpses of hunger victims.
1931年，华东地区水灾，造成370多万人死亡。
More than 3.7 million lives were lost when floods hit east China in 1931.
1943年，仅河南省饿死者就达300万人，另有1500万人靠啃草根、吃树皮度日，濒临死亡边缘。
In 1943, a crop failure in Henan Province took the lives of 3 million people and left 15 million subsisting on grass and bark and struggling on the verge of death. 
抗日战争胜利后，国民党反动政府发动内战，榨取民脂民膏，造成经济全面崩溃。
After the victory of the War of Resistance Against Japan, the reactionary Kuomintang government launched a civil war, fed on the flesh and blood of the people and caused total economic collapse. 
1946年，各地饿死1000万人。1947年，全国饥民竟达1亿多人，占当时全国人口的22%。
In 1946, 10 million people died of hunger countrywide. In 1947, 100 million, or 22 percent of the national population then, were under the constant threat of hunger.


1949年新中国建立以来，中国共产党和中国政府始终把解决人民的温饱问题作为自己的头等大事和最紧迫的任务。
Ever since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the Communist Party of China and the Chinese government have always placed the task of helping the people get enough to wear and eat on the top of the agenda.
人民政府领导全国人民用了三年时间，集中精力医治战争创伤，使国民经济迅速恢复到历史的最高水平。
For the first three years of the People's Republic, the Chinese people, led by their government, concentrated their efforts on healing the wounds of war and quickly restored the national economy to the record level in history.
在此基础上，中国又不失时机地实现了对农业、手工业和资本主义工商业的社会主义改造，从根本上消灭了剥削制度，实行了社会主义制度，使中国人民在历史上第一次成为生产资料的主人和社会财富的享有者。
On this basis, China lost no time to complete the socialist transformation of agriculture, handicraft industry and capitalist industry and commerce, thus uprooting the system of exploitation, instituting the system of socialism and, for the first time in history, turning the people into masters of the means of production and beneficiaries of social wealth.
这就极大地激发了人民群众建设新中国和新生活的积极性，解放了社会生产力，使社会经济以中国历史上空前的速度发展。
This fired the people with soaring enthusiasm for building a new China and a new life, emancipated the social productive forces and set the economy on the track of unprecedented growth. 
1979年以后，中国以经济建设为中心，实行改革开放，建设有中国特色的社会主义，进一步促进了社会生产力的发展，从而基本解决了11亿人口的吃饭、穿衣问题。
Since 1979, China has switched the focus of its work to economic construction, begun reform and opening to the outside world, and set the goal of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. This has further expanded the social productive forces and enabled the nation to basically solve the problem of feeding and clothing its 1.1 billion people.


中国耕地只占世界耕地的7%，人均占有量只有1.3亩，比美国的人均12.16亩和世界平均数4.52亩低得多，却养活了占世界人口22%的人。
Tilling 7 percent of the world's total cultivated land -- averaging only 1.3 mu (one mu equals one-fifteenth of one hectare) per capita as against 12.16 mu in the United States and the world's average of 4.52 mu -- China has nevertheless succeeded in feeding a population that makes up 22 percent of the world's total. 
西方某些政治家曾经断言：中国没有一个政府能够解决人民的吃饭问题。但是，社会主义中国依靠自己的力量解决了这一历史难题。
Contrary to some Western politicians' prediction that no Chinese government could solve the problem of feeding its people, socialist China has done it by its own efforts. 
40多年来，虽然中国平均每年净增1400多万人口，但是主要生活消费品人均年消费量却有很大提高。
The past 40-odd years have witnessed a marked increase in the average annual per-capita consumption of major consumer goods despite a yearly average population increase of 14 million. 
根据抽样调查，中国居民每人每天从食品中摄取的热量，1952年为2270千卡，1978年为2311千卡左右，1990年达到2630千卡左右，已接近世界平均水平。
A survey shows that the daily caloric intake of food per resident in China was 2,270 in 1952, 2,311 in 1978 and 2,630 in 1990, approaching the world's average.


　　中国人民的寿命和健康水平有了很大提高。
The life-span of the Chinese people has lengthened and their health improved considerably.
据统计，中国人口平均预期寿命已从解放前的35岁提高到1988年的70岁，超过世界中等收入国家水平。人口死亡率从解放前高达33‰下降到1990年的6.67‰，成为世界上死亡率最低的国家之一。
According to statistics, the population's average life expectancy increased from 35 years before liberation to 70 years in 1988, higher than the average level in the world's medium-income countries, while the death rate dropped from 33 per thousand before liberation to 6.67 per thousand in 1990, which was one of the lowest death rates in the world.
1987年，中国的婴儿死亡率为31‰，已接近高收入国家水平。
China's 1987 infant mortality of 31 per thousand approached the level of high-income countries.
中国人口的体质特别是青少年的身体发育状况，也比旧中国有很大提高。
The health of the Chinese people, especially the physical development of youngsters, has greatly improved as compared with the situation in old China.
1979年同1937—1941年相比，15岁的男孩身高增加1.8厘米，平均体重增加2.1公斤；15岁的女孩身高增加1.3厘米，体重增加1公斤。
An average 15-year-old boy in 1979 was 1.8 centimeters taller and 2.1 kilograms heavier than his counterparts living during the 1937-41 period; and an average girl of the same age in 1979 was 1.3 centimeters taller and 1 kilogram heavier.
从1979年至今，中国人民的体质又有了明显的提高，彻底甩掉了旧中国“东亚病夫”的帽子。
Since 1979, the health of the Chinese people has improved further. The label on old China, "sick man of East Asia," has long been consigned to the dustbin of history.
　　人民的温饱问题基本解决了，人民的生存权问题也就基本解决了。
The problem of food and clothing having been basically solved, the people have been guaranteed with the basic right to subsistence. 
这是中国人民和中国政府在争取和维护人权方面取得的历史性的成就。
This is a historical achievement made by the Chinese people and government in seeking and protecting human rights.

在中国，维护人民的生存权利，改善人民的生存条件，至今仍然是一个首要问题。
to protect the people's right to subsistence and improve their living conditions remains an issue of paramount importance in China today.
虽然中国已取得了独立，但中国仍然是发展中国家，国力有限，维护中国的独立与主权，保证中国不再受到帝国主义的欺凌，仍然是中国人民生存和发展的基本条件。
China has gained independence, but it is still a developing country with limited national strength. The preservation of national independence and state sovereignty and the freedom from imperialist subjugation are, therefore, the very fundamental conditions for the survival and development of the Chinese people.
虽然中国已经基本解决了温饱问题，但是，经济发展水平还比较低，人民的生活水平与发达国家相比还有较大的差距，人口的压力和人均资源的相对贫乏还将制约着社会经济的发展和人民生活的改善。
Although China has basically solved the problem of food and clothing, its economy is still at a fairly low level, its standard of living falls considerably short of that in developed countries, and the pressure of a huge population and relative per-capita paucity of resources will continue to restrict the socio-economic development and the improvement of the people's lives. 
一旦发生动乱或其他灾难，人民的生存权还会受到威胁。
The people's right to subsistence will still be threatened in the event of a social turmoil or other disasters.
所以，保持国家稳定，沿着已取得成功的路线，集中精力发展生产力，坚持改革开放，努力把国民经济搞上去，增强国力，使全国人民的生活在温饱的基础上进一步达到小康水平，从而使人民的生存权不致受到威胁，这是中国人民最根本的愿望和要求，也是中国政府一项长期而紧迫的任务。
   Therefore it is the fundamental wish and demand of the Chinese people and a long-term, urgent task of the Chinese government to maintain national stability, concentrate their effort on developing the productive forces along the line which has proven to be successful, persist in reform and opening to the outside world, strive to rejuvenate the national economy and boost the national strength, and, on the basis of having solved the problem of food and clothing, secure a well-off livelihood for the people throughout the country so that their right to subsistence will no longer be threatened.

中国人民获得了广泛的政治权利
The Chinese People Have Gained Extensive Political Rights


　　中国人民在争取生存权的同时，为争取民主权利进行了可歌可泣的斗争。
While struggling for the right to subsistence, the Chinese people have waged a heroic struggle for democratic rights. 
　　在半封建、半殖民地的旧中国，广大人民毫无民主权利可言。
The people did not have any democratic rights to speak of in semi-feudal, semi-colonial China.
伟大的资产阶级民主革命先行者孙中山领导的辛亥革命推翻了封建清王朝，建立了中华民国。
The Revolution of 1911 led by Dr. Sun Yat-sen, the great forerunner of bourgeois-democratic revolution, overthrew the feudal Qing Dynasty and gave rise to the Republic of China. 
他曾希望在中国实行西方的民主制度，但是革命果实被封建军阀袁世凯窃取。
He hoped to establish a Western-style democratic system in China, but the fruits of the revolution were snatched by Yuan Shikai, a feudal warlord.
以后，议会成为军阀争权夺利的工具，发生了被称作“猪仔议会”的贿选总统的丑闻。
Then parliament became a mere instrument for warlords in power struggle, and there occurred the scandal of the "parliament of pigs" and bribery in electing a president.
孙中山终究未能实现他的理想，在“革命尚未成功”的忧愤中病逝。
His dream unfulfilled, Dr. Sun died in sorrow and indignation, which found expression in his famous admonition: "The revolution has not yet succeeded."
许多中国人也曾对美国支持的蒋介石政府抱有幻想。
Many Chinese had cherished illusions about the US-supported Chiang Kai-shek government. 
但是，蒋介石只是又一个军阀，他实行法西斯统治，对争取民主的民众进行血腥屠杀，使千百万人倒在血泊之中。
However, Chiang turned out to be just another warlord under whose fascist rule millions of democracy-seeking people perished in bloody massacres.
他不顾中国共产党、各界爱国民主人士和广大人民的反对，对日本帝国主义的侵略实行不抵抗政策，加紧内战。
He adopted a non-resistance policy towards the Japanese invasion while stepping up the civil war, ignoring opposition from the Chinese Communists, patriots and democrats from all walks of life and the broad masses of the people.
在抗日战争胜利后，他又违反中国共产党、各民主党派和全国人民要求和平民主建设的迫切愿望，发动大规模内战。
He launched the all-out civil war after the victory of the War of Resistance Against Japan, again violating the ardent wish for peace, democracy and reconstruction of the Communist Party, the democratic parties and the people throughout China.
广大人民忍无可忍，奋起斗争，终于推翻了蒋介石的反动统治。
Driven beyond the limits of forbearance, the people rose up in arms and in the end toppled Chiang's reactionary rule.


中国共产党从成立之日起，就高举争民主、争人权的旗帜。
Since the very day of its founding, the Communist Party of China has been holding high the banner of democracy and human rights.
它推动和协助孙中山改组国民党，实行国共合作，发动反对军阀统治的北伐战争。
It encouraged and assisted Dr. Sun in reorganizing the Kuomintang, effected the cooperation between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party and launched the Northern Expedition against the reactionary rule of the warlords.
在蒋介石背叛民主革命后，中国共产党联合各界爱国民主人士，领导全国人民开展反内战、反饥饿、反独裁、反迫害的斗争；
After Chiang Kai-shek betrayed the democratic revolution, the Party united all patriots and democrats and led the people in a struggle against civil war, hunger, autocracy and persecution. 
在解放区建立了民主政府，制定了保障人民民主权利的法律，坚决实行了自己的民主纲领。
In the liberated areas it established democratic governments, drew up laws which guaranteed the people's democratic rights and resolutely implemented its own democratic program.
解放区的民主制度吸引了全国千千万万爱国民主志士，成为全国人民的希望所在。
The democratic system in the liberated areas attracted numerous patriotic and democratic fighters and became the hope of the entire people.
在中国共产党的领导下，人民推翻了国民党反动派在中国的独裁统治，建立了一个民主的、自由的中华人民共和国。
    Under the Party's leadership, the Chinese people overthrew the Kuomintang reactionaries' dictatorial rule and founded the democratic and free People's Republic of China.


新中国成立后，全国人民获得了真正的民主权利。
The Chinese people gained real democratic rights after the founding of New China.
中国宪法明确规定，中华人民共和国的一切权力属于人民。
In explicit terms the Constitution stipulates that all power in the People's Republic of China belongs to the people.
人民当家作主，这是中国民主政治的实质。
That the people are masters of their own country is the essence of China's democratic politics.
宪法还规定，中华人民共和国是工人阶级领导的、以工农联盟为基础的人民民主专政的社会主义国家。这就确定了工人、农民和其他劳动者在国家中的主人翁地位，使旧中国处在社会最低层的劳动人民获得法定的民主权利。
By stating that the People's Republic of China is a socialist state of the people's democratic dictatorship led by the working class and based on the alliance of workers and peasants, the Constitution has established the status of the workers, peasants and other working people as masters of the country and thus invested the laboring people who were at the bottom rung of the social ladder in old China with lawful democratic rights.
宪法规定男女平等，使占中国人口一半的妇女在政治、经济、文化、社会和家庭生活等各方面，获得与男子平等的权利；
Equality of men and women, as provided by the Constitution, has enabled women, who account for half of the Chinese population, to gain the same rights as men in politics, economy, culture, society and family life.
规定中国各民族一律平等，使中国各少数民族享有同汉族同等的民主权利。
The stipulation that all nationalities in China are equal has ensured that all the nation's minority nationalities enjoy equal democratic rights with the Han people.


为了保障人民真正成为国家的主人，保障人民行使管理国家经济和社会事务的权利，中国根据自己的国情，采取人民代表大会作为国家的根本政治制度。
To guarantee that the people are the real masters of the country with the right to run the country's economic and social affairs, China has adopted, in light of its actual conditions, the people's congresses as the state's basic political system.
各级人民代表大会的代表由民主选举产生。
Deputies to the people's congresses at all levels are chosen through democratic elections.
宪法规定，中华人民共和国年满18周岁的公民，不分民族、种族、性别、职业、家庭出身、宗教信仰、教育程度、财产状况、居住期限，都有选举权和被选举权，依照法律被剥夺政治权利的人除外。
The Constitution stipulates that all citizens of the People's Republic of China who have reached the age of 18 have the right to vote and stand for election, regardless of nationality, race, sex, occupation, family background, religious belief, education, property status, or length of residence, with the exception of persons deprived of their political rights by law.
中国根据土地辽阔、人口众多、交通不便、经济文化发展水平还比较低等条件，确定了适合自己国情的选举制度，即对县级及其以下人民代表大会的代表实行直接选举，对县级以上的人民代表大会的代表实行间接选举。
Taking into consideration its vast territory, large population, inconvenient transportation and relatively low economic and cultural development, China has adopted an election system appropriate to its actual conditions. That is, deputies to people's congresses at the county level or below are elected directly, while those to people's congresses above the county level are elected indirectly.
这种选举制度，有利于人民真正能选举出自己了解的、信得过的代表。
This election system makes it possible for the people to choose deputies whom they know and trust.
这些年来，在总结经验的基础上，对选举办法又作了改进，如改变等额选举办法，实行差额选举等。
The election system has been improved in recent years on the basis of past experience. For instance, more candidates are posted than the number of deputies to be elected, instead of an equal number as before.
中国人民普遍行使了自己的选举权利。
The right to vote has been widely exercised by the Chinese people.
据1990年全国县、乡直接选举统计，享有这种权利的人占18岁以上公民人数的99.97%。
According to statistics from the 1990 county- and township-level direct elections, 99.97 percent of the citizens at 18 years of age or above enjoyed the right to vote. 
各省、自治区、直辖市的参选率一般都在90%以上。
Generally speaking, upwards of 90 percent of the voters participate in the elections held in the various provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities.
中国选举制度最显著的特点是，选举不受金钱的操纵，代表当选与否，不是靠吹嘘、许愿，而是看其对国家对社会实际贡献的大小、为人民服务的态度和与人民群众的联系如何。
The most striking characteristic of China's electoral system is that elections are not manipulated by money and that deputies are not elected on the basis of boasting and empty promises but according to their actual contributions to the country and society, their attitude in serving the people and their close relations with the people.
从选举的结果可以看出，当选代表具有广泛性，代表着各阶层各行各业的广大人民。
It is clear from the election results that the elected are broadly representative, that is, representative of people of all social strata and all trades and professions. 
第七届全国人民代表大会共有代表2970名，其中工农684名，占23%；知识分子697名，占23.4%；国家公务人员733名，占24.7%；民主党派和无党派爱国人士540名，占18.2%；人民解放军267名，占9%；归侨49人，占1.6%。
Of the 2,970 deputies to the Seventh National People's Congress, 684, or 23 percent, are workers and farmers; 697, or 23.4 percent, are intellectuals; 733, or 24.7 percent, are government functionaries; 540, or 18.2 percent, are democratic party members and patriots with no party affiliations; 267, or 9 percent, are from the People's Liberation Army; and 49, or 1.6 percent, are returned overseas Chinese.

全国人民代表大会是最高国家权力机关。
The National People's Congress is the supreme organ of state power.
它拥有立法权。
It has legislative power.
国家主席、副主席，中央军委主席，最高人民法院院长，最高人民检察院检察长由它选举产生或者罢免；政府总理、副总理、国务委员、各部部长、各委员会主任、审计长、秘书长的人选由它决定或者罢免。
It elects or removes president and vice-president of the People's Republic of China, chairman of the Central Military Commission, president of the Supreme People's Court and procurator-general of the Supreme People's Procuratorate;and appoints or removes premier, vice-premiers, state councilors, ministers, ministers in charge of commissions, auditor-general and secretary-general.
国家行政机关、审判机关、检察机关，都由它产生，对它负责，受它监督。
All administrative, judicial and procuratorial organs of the state are created by the National People's Congress, responsible to it and supervised by it.
人民代表大会实行民主集中制原则，在决定大政方针时充分发表意见，决定后即共同贯彻执行。
Following the principle of democratic centralism, the National People's Congress adopts major policy decisions after full airing of opinions; and once adopted, these policies are carried out in a concerted effort.
这既能集中人民的意志，又能使人民通过它管理国家、经济和社会事务。
In this way, the People's Congress can not only represent the people's common will but also become instrumental for the people in running state, economic and social affairs. 
人民代表来自人民中间，对人民负责，受人民监督。
Coming from among the people, the people's deputies are responsible to the people and supervised by the people;
他们密切联系群众，广泛了解实际情况，有利于充分反映人民的意愿，制定切合实际的法律和监督国家机关的工作。
their close contact with the masses and wide knowledge of the actual situation enable them to fully reflect the people's wishes, formulate laws suited to reality and supervise the work of government organs.

中国共产党是社会主义中国的执政党，它是全中国人民利益的集中代表。
The Chinese Communist Party is the ruling party of socialist China and the representative of the interests of the people throughout the country. 
它的领导地位，是中国人民在争取独立和解放的长期艰苦斗争中所作出的历史性选择。
Its leadership position has been the result of the historical choice made by the Chinese people during their protracted and arduous struggle for independence and emancipation.
党的领导主要是思想政治的领导。
The leadership of the Party is mainly an ideological and political leadership.
党集中人民的意志，形成自己的主张和政策，然后通过国家的法定程序，经人民代表大会决定，成为国家的法律和决定。
The Party derives its ideas and policies from the people's concentrated will and then turns them into state laws and decisions which are passed by the National People's Congress through the state's legal procedures.
在国家领导体制中，党不代替政府的职能。
The Party does not take the place of the government in the state's leadership system.
党在宪法和法律的范围内活动，没有超越宪法和法律的任何权力。
The Party conducts its activities within the framework of the Constitution and the law and has no right to transcend the Constitution and the law.
任何党员，同每个公民一样，在法律面前人人平等。
All Party members, like all citizens in the country, are equal before the law.

实行共产党领导的多党合作和政治协商制度，是体现人民民主的一项基本政治制度。
The system of multi-party cooperation and political consultation under the leadership of the Communist Party is the basic political system that gives expression to people's democracy.

它保障各社会阶层、各人民团体和各界爱国人士，都能在国家政治生活和社会生活中表达自己的意见和发挥作用。
It guarantees that all social strata, people's organizations and patriots from various quarters can express their opinions and play a role in the country's political and social life.

政治协商会议是由各党派、各人民团体和拥护社会主义、拥护祖国统一的爱国民主人士的代表组成的。
The Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) consists of representatives of all the political parties and people's organizations and from among patriots and democrats who support socialism and the reunification of the motherland.
新中国第一届中央人民政府就是由第一届全国政治协商会议选举产生的。
New China's first Central People's Government was elected by the First Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference.

中国十分重视基层民主建设，以保障公民能直接行使公民政治权利。
China attaches great importance to the promotion of democracy at the grass-roots level so as to guarantee that citizens can directly exercise their political rights. 

中国宪法规定了广泛的公民政治权利。
The Constitution provides for a wide range of political rights to citizens.
除了上述的选举权和被选举权之外，公民有言论、出版、集会、结社、游行、示威的自由。
In addition to the right to vote and to be elected mentioned above, citizens also enjoy freedoms of speech, the press, assembly, association, procession and demonstration.
在中国，没有新闻检查制度。
There is no news censorship in China.

宪法规定，中华人民共和国公民的人身自由不受侵犯。
The Constitution provides that freedom of the person of citizens of the People's Republic of China is inviolable.

宪法规定中国实行人民民主专政制度，这就是在人民内部实行民主和对人民的敌人实行专政的结合。
The Constitution provides that China implements the system of people's democratic dictatorship, which combines democracy among the people and dictatorship against the people's enemies.

强调权利与义务的统一，是中国法制的一项基本原则。
The unity between rights and duties is a basic principle of China's legal system.
人人在宪法和法律规定的权利和义务面前一律平等。
Everyone is equal before the rights and duties prescribed by the Constitution and the law.
任何组织或者个人都不得有超越宪法和法律的特权。
No organization or individual may enjoy the privilege of being above the Constitution and the law.


建国40多年的实践证明，中国实行的社会主义民主和法制是适合中国国情的，人民是满意的。
Practice of the past 40-odd years since liberation proves that the socialist democracy and legal system adopted by China are suited to the country's actual conditions and that the people is satisfied with it.

公民享有经济、文化和社会权利
 Citizens Enjoy Economic, Cultural and Social Rights

中国主张的人权，不只是生存权和公民政治权利，而且包括经济、文化和社会等方面的权利。
The human rights advocated by China encompass not only the right to subsistence and the civic and political rights, but also economic, cultural and social rights. 
中国政府重视维护和实现国家、民族和个人的经济、文化、社会和政治的发展权。
The Chinese government pays due attention to the protection and realization of the rights of the country, the various nationalities and private citizens to economic, cultural, social and political development.

社会主义中国消灭了人剥削人的制度，从而在历史上第一次使全体劳动者获得在经济上平等发展的权利。
Socialist China eliminated the system of exploitation of man by man, thus making it possible for the first time in history for all working people to secure the right to equal economic development.
中国坚持以生产资料社会主义公有制为主体，同时允许和鼓励其他经济成分适当发展，作为社会主义经济的补充。
China upholds the socialist system of public ownership of the means of production as the mainstay while at the same time permitting and encouraging the appropriate development of other economic sectors as supplements to the socialist economy. 

经济上的平等，极大地调动了劳动者的积极性，使中国经济获得迅速发展。
Economic equality has motivated the laboring people to a great extent and brought about speedy growth of the Chinese economy.

建国40多年，特别是改革开放10多年以来，中国经济的发展速度在世界上居于前列。
Over the past 40-odd post-liberation years and particularly in the past decade and more since the adoption of the policy of reform and opening to the outside world, China has all along been in the front rank of the world in terms of the rate of economic growth.

随着国民经济的发展中国人民的整体生活水平有了很大提高。
With the growth of the national economy, the overall living standards of the Chinese people have greatly improved. 

新中国的经济发展和人民生活水平提高的速度，不仅是旧中国所根本不可比拟的，而且在国际社会中也是居于前列的。
The speeds at which the economy grows and the people's living standards improve in New China are not only something inconceivable in old China, but also among the highest in the world community.

劳动权是公民的一项基本权利。
The right to work is a basic right of the citizens. 
在旧中国，人民没有自主劳动的权利，
In old China, people were deprived of the right to work according to their own will.
劳动权操纵在占有生产资料的地主、资本家的手中，劳动人民时刻面临失业的威胁。
This right was controlled by the landlords and capitalists, the owners of the means of production. The working people were constantly threatened by the prospect of unemployment.
1949年全国解放初期，城镇失业者达474.2万人，相当于当时职工的60%。
When China was liberated in 1949, a total of 4.742 million, or 60 percent of the total labor force in the cities, were jobless. 
建国以后，宪法规定了公民有劳动的权利和义务，
It is stipulated in the Constitution that Chinese citizens have both the right and the duty to work.
政府采取各种措施解决了就业问题，广大劳动人民以主人翁的姿态参加社会主义建设。
The government took all sorts of measures and solved the problem of unemployment, thereby enabling the masses of the working people to take part in socialist construction as masters of the society.
1979—1990年12年期间，全国城镇新增就业人员9400万人。
In the 12 years between 1979 and 1990, a total of 94 million new jobs were created in urban areas.
随着生产力的发展，农村剩余劳动力的问题突出起来。
With the expansion of the productive forces, the problem of rural surplus labor emerged as a major issue.
中国政府采取“离土不离乡”的方针，大力发展乡镇企业，发展各种工副业专业户的办法，基本上解决了农村剩余劳动力的出路问题。
The Chinese government has adopted the policy for some of the farmers to "leave the field but remain in the village," and, by vigorously developing rural enterprises and encouraging individual households to run industrial and sideline occupations along specialized lines, found the fundamental way out for the surplus labor force in rural areas. 
1985年以来，城镇待业人员待业率一直保持在2.5%左右，同世界各国相比是很低的。
Since 1985, the unemployment rate in urban areas has remained at around 2.5 percent, which is fairly low as compared with other countries in the world.

中国宪法明确规定保护公共财产和公民合法财产。
The Constitution provides that public property and the legitimate property of citizens are protected.

受教育的权利，是人的全面自由发展的重要前提。
The right of education is an important prerequisite for the overall, free development of human beings. 
在旧中国，绝大多数劳动人民享受不到受教育的权利。
In old China, the majority of the working people did not have the right of education.

中国实行改革开放政策以来，出国留学的人员大量增加。
Since China adopted the policy of reform and opening to the outside world, the number of students studying abroad has been rapidly increasing.


中国公民有进行科学研究、文化艺术创作的自由。
The Chinese citizens enjoy freedom of scientific research and literary and artistic creation.

在中国，保护知识产权的法律体系已经基本建立。
China has formed a legal system to protect intellectual property rights.
中国先后颁布和实施了商标法和专利法。
A trademark law and a patent law have been promulgated and put in force.

卫生事业是保障人的生命健康权的必要条件。
Public health facilities are a necessary guarantee for the human rights of life and health.
在旧中国，卫生机构和卫生技术人员数量少、水平低，绝大部分集中在城市。
In old China, health organizations and technicians were in short supply and at a low level and the majority of them were concentrated in urban areas.
新中国建立后，逐步建成了一个包括各级各类卫生机构、各种卫生人员组成的、遍布城乡的医疗卫生网。
After the founding of New China, a public health network was gradually established. Covering all the cities and countryside, this network includes many kinds of health organizations at various levels and employs different types of public health workers.

尊老是中华民族的优良传统。
The Chinese nation has a fine tradition of respecting elderly people.
这一传统在新中国得到发扬光大。
This tradition has been carried forward in New China.
年老者有从国家和社会获得物质帮助的权利。
Senior citizens have the right to material assistance from the state and society.
成年子女对父母有赡养扶助的义务。
Adult offspring have the obligation to provide for their parents.
中国十分重视妇女、儿童和青少年的权利保障。
China attaches great importance to guaranteeing the rights of women, children and teenagers.

宪法规定，妇女在政治的、经济的、文化的、社会的和家庭的生活等各方面享有同男子平等的权利。
According to the Constitution, women share equal rights with men in political, economic, cultural, social and family life. 
妇女享有同男子平等的选举权和被选举权。
Like men, they have the right to elect and to be elected.
在各级人民代表和领导工作人员中，妇女都占有相当的比例。
A considerable percentage of people's deputies and officials at various levels are women. 

国家特别重视保护妇女的婚姻自主权，禁止买卖、包办婚姻和其他干涉婚姻自主的行为。
The state also pays special attention to protecting women's right to freedom of choice in marriage and forbids mercenary and arranged marriages and other acts of interference in other people's freedom of marriage.
司法机关依法严厉打击拐卖妇女的罪犯。
The judicial departments have taken stern measures according to law against criminals engaged in the sale of women.


国家制定了保护儿童的法律和法规。
The state has formulated laws and regulations to protect children.
严格禁止虐待和拐卖儿童，禁止使用童工。
It is strictly forbidden to ill-treat and sell children and to use child labor.
为保障儿童的生命健康，国家发布了有关加强托儿所、幼儿园卫生保健，提高保育水平的决定和防治小儿麻痹、天花、白喉、结核等疾病的专门规定。
In order to safeguard the life and health of children, the state has issued a decision on strengthening and improving the health care in nurseries and kindergartens, and formulated special regulations to prevent and treat diseases such as infantile paralysis, smallpox, diphtheria and tuberculosis.
中国儿童的保健率和学龄儿童入学率，同世界发展中国家相比，是较高的。
China enjoys a relatively high rate of health care for children and of schooling for school-age children compared with other developing countries.
中国儿童的预防接种率接近世界发达国家的平均水平。
The rate of inoculated children in China has almost reached the average level of developed countries.

在中国，罪犯服刑期间的应有权利，依法受到保护。
In China, the rights of prisoners while serving their sentences are protected by law.
依据中国法律规定，罪犯除依法被剥夺政治权利的以外，享有选举权。
According to China's law, all prisoners, with exception of those who have been legally deprived of their political rights, have the right to vote.
罪犯享有申诉权、辩护权、人格不受侮辱和人身安全、合法财产不受侵犯权、控告权、检举权，以及其他未被法律限制的公民权利。
Prisoners also have the right to appeal, the right of defense, the right of immunity from insult to their dignity and from infringement of personal security and of legal property, the right of complaint, the right of accusation, and other civic rights which have not been curtailed by the law.
罪犯在服刑期间，有权以通信或会见的方式，定期同家人或其他亲属联系。
Convicted criminals, while serving their sentences, have the right to contact family members and other relatives regularly by correspondence or visits.
罪犯家中发生直系亲属病危、死亡或其他重大事情，确需本人回去处理的，可以批准其短期回家。
If an important event happens in a criminal's family such as critical illness or the death of a directly-related family member, and if it is really necessary for the criminal himself to go back home to handle matters, he can be permitted to go home for a short period of time.

罪犯在服刑期间可以阅读报刊书籍，可以看电视、听广播，参加有益于身心健康的文娱体育活动。
While serving their sentences, prisoners can read newspapers, magazines and books, watch television, listen to the radio, and take part in recreational and sports activities that are beneficial to the body and mind.
监狱、劳改场所有供罪犯阅读的图书馆。
In prisons and reform-through-labor institutions there are libraries where criminals can go to read.
正在服刑的罪犯与普通公民一样，享有宗教信仰自由，允许信教的罪犯保持原有的宗教信仰，并在生活上照顾少数民族罪犯的生活习惯。
Like ordinary citizens, prisoners who are serving their sentences have the freedom of religious belief. Prisoners with religious beliefs can maintain their beliefs, and allowances are made for the customs and habits of prisoners of minority nationalities.
罪犯享有必要的物质生活待遇。
Prisoners are accorded the material treatment necessary in their daily lives.
罪犯的生活费、医疗费由国家供给，粮油、副食品按当地居民标准供应。
The state covers their living and medical expenses, and their grain, edible oil and non-staple food rations are set according to the same standards for local residents.

中国工人是企业的主人。
Chinese workers are the masters of their enterprises.
工人的利益同企业的兴衰紧密相关，企业管理者与工人没有根本的利害冲突。
Workers' interests are closely connected with the enterprises' prosperity, and there is no conflict of fundamental interests between the managers and the workers.
这一现实决定了中国保障劳动者权利的制度，与雇佣劳动制度下的模式不同。
This reality determines that China's system of protecting workers' rights is different from that under the wage-labor system.

中国政府非常重视劳动法制建设。
The Chinese government attaches great importance to labor legislation. 

中国宪法规定，公民有宗教信仰自由。
China's Constitution stipulates that citizens enjoy freedom of religious belief.
国家保护正常的宗教活动和宗教界的合法权益。
The state protects normal religious activities and the lawful rights and interests of the religious circles.

政府设有宗教工作部门，负责宗教信仰自由政策的贯彻执行。
The government has established departments of religious affairs responsible for the implementation of the policy of religious freedom.

在中国，由于贯彻执行正确的宗教政策，各宗教之间，各宗教团体之间，信教群众与不信教群众之间，互相尊重，和睦相处。
In China, because of these policies, different religions and religious organizations as well as religious people and nonreligious people respect each other and live in harmony.

少数民族的权利保障
 Guarantee of the Rights of The Minority Nationality

中国是一个统一的多民族国家，有56个民族。
China is a unified, multi-national country, with 56 nationalities in all.
实现各民族平等、团结和共同繁荣，是中国对待民族关系的基本原则。
To realize equality, unity and common prosperity among the nationalities is China's basic principle guiding relationships between nationalities.
中国宪法规定，中华人民共和国各民族一律平等。
The Constitution provides that all nationalities in the People's Republic of China are equal.
国家保障各少数民族的合法权利和利益，维护和发展各民族的平等、团结、互助关系。
The state protects the lawful rights and interests of the minority nationalities and upholds and develops the relationship of equality, unity and mutual assistance among all of China's nationalities.
禁止对任何民族的歧视和压迫，禁止破坏民族团结和制造民族分裂的行为。
Discrimination against and oppression of any nationality are prohibited, and any acts that undermine the unity and create splits among the nationalities are also prohibited. 
宪法还明确规定，在维护民族团结的斗争中，要反对大民族主义，主要是大汉族主义，也要反对地方民族主义。
The Constitution clearly stipulates that in striving for unity among all its nationalities, China opposes great-nation chauvinism, especially great-Han chauvinism, as well as local nationalism.

在旧中国，长期存在着严重的民族歧视和民族压迫。
In old China, severe national discrimination and oppression existed over a long period of time. 
许多少数民族不被承认，境遇悲惨，有的只能躲进深山，过着与世隔绝的生活。
Many of the minority nationalities, who were in straitened circumstances and not countenanced, had to hide in the mountains and live a life of seclusion from the outside world.

1949年中华人民共和国成立后，废除了民族歧视、民族压迫制度，少数民族的状况得到了根本改变。
After the People's Republic of China was founded in 1949, discrimination against and oppression of minority nationalities were abolished and their condition underwent a thorough change.
五十年代，中国政府组织了大规模的民族识别调查，经过科学地辨认，认定公布了55个少数民族。
In the 1950s, the Chinese government organized a large-scale investigation for identification of the nationalities. After scientific differentiation, 55 minority nationalities were acknowledged and this fact was announced publicly.
多数少数民族在历史上第一次成为中国民族大家庭中平等的一员。
Most of the minority nationalities, for the first time in China's history, became equal members of the great family of Chinese nationalities.


新中国建立了民族区域自治制度。
New China brought about the system of regional autonomy for minority nationalities.
在少数民族聚居地区设立自治机关，由当地民族自己管理本民族的内部事务。
Organs of self-government were set up in regions where people of minority nationalities live in compact communities, and the internal affairs of the minority nationalities were handled by themselves.

在新中国，少数民族的政治权利得到保障。
In New China the political rights of minority nationalities are ensured.
解放前，少数民族人民同广大汉族人民一样，深受反动统治阶级的压迫。
Before liberation, the minority nationalities, like the majority of the Han people, suffered under severe oppression by the reactionary ruling class.
这种压迫在有的地方更为野蛮、残酷。
The oppression in some areas took more savage and cruel forms than in others. 
在这种情况下，广大劳动群众当然毫无人权可言。
Under such circumstances, the human rights of the majority of laboring people were out of the question.
新中国建立之后，少数民族地区先后实行了民主改革，废除了旧制度。
After New China was founded, the old system was abolished and democratic reforms were carried out in one minority area after another.
民主改革使世代受压迫的少数民族人民获得了人身自由、人格尊严，争得了基本人权，第一次成为主宰自己命运的主人。
Thanks to the democratic reform, the minority nationalities, oppressed for generations, obtained the freedom of person and human dignity, won basic human rights and for the first time became masters of their own destiny.
今天，少数民族人民同汉族人民一样，平等地享有宪法和法律规定的全部公民权利；同时还依据法律，享有少数民族特有的权利。
Today, the minority nationalities, as equals of the Han nationality, enjoy all the civil rights which are set down in the Constitution and the law. In addition, the minority nationalities enjoy some special rights accorded to them by law.
　　少数民族参与行使国家最高权力的权利受到特殊保障。
The right of the minority nationalities to participate in the exercise of the supreme power of the state is specially protected.

地方人民代表大会是地方国家权力机关。
The local people's congress is the local organ of state power.

中国各民族的人民都可以担任国家机构和政府部门的各种职务。
The Chinese people of all nationalities are eligible to hold any posts in the state organ and government departments.
在这方面，同样不存在对少数民族的任何歧视。
In this respect, there is also no discrimination against the minority nationalities. 

国家积极培养少数民族干部。
The state always pays close attention to training cadres from among people of minority nationalities.
近年来，少数民族干部以每年递增上万人的速度在增长。
In recent years, the number of minority nationality cadres has gone up at a rate of more than 10,000 people annually.

民族地区经济文化和社会发展的权利受到特殊照顾。
The rights of the national autonomous regions to economic, cultural and social development are given special consideration.
在中华人民共和国成立之前，少数民族地区的经济文化和社会发展极为落后。
Before the founding of the People's Republic of China, the economic, cultural and social development in minority areas was extremely backward.
新中国成立后，人民政府积极帮助各族人民发展经济文化事业，改革落后的生产方式，使各民族的社会发展跨越了几个历史阶段。
After the founding of New China, the people's government actively helped the minority nationalities develop their economies and culture in an effort to change their outdated mode of production. This enabled them to leap over several historical stages of social development.
现在，绝大多数少数民族人民的温饱问题得到了解决。
Now most of the minority nationalities have solved the problem of food and clothing.

为了帮助少数民族的经济发展，国家在少数民族地区进行了大规模的经济建设。
In order to help minority nationalities develop their economies, the state has carried out economic construction on a large scale in minority areas.

在劳动政策方面，中国政府也制定了照顾少数民族的政策。
As for employment policy, the Chinese government has formulated a special policy for the minority nationalities.
政府规定，国家在少数民族地区的企业要优先招收当地少数民族公民进入企业工作。
The government requires that state-owned enterprises in minority areas give precedence to local citizens of the minority nationalities over all others when recruiting workers.
各民族地方政府应有计划地从农、牧区招收少数民族农牧民进入国营企业做工等。
Various local governments, when recruiting workers for state-owned enterprises, should employ minority farmers and herdsmen from rural and pastoral areas in a planned way.

中国政府大力发展少数民族地区的医疗卫生事业，改变这些地区长期以来缺医少药的状况。
The Chinese government has greatly developed medical and health undertakings in the minority regions, tackling the problem of shortage of doctors and medicine that has existed for a long time there.

中国政府重视维护和发展各少数民族的优秀传统文化，大力发展少数民族的教育文化事业。
The Chinese government has paid a great deal of attention to maintaining and developing the excellent traditional cultures of various nationalities, and made tremendous efforts to promote the culture and education of the minority nationalities.

少数民族地区与内地、沿海地区发展上的差距，是历史上长期形成的。
The disparity between the minority regions and the inland and coastal areas arose and developed over a long historical period.
40多年来，中国政府为缩小这种差距，推动少数民族地区的社会发展，改变民族地区的落后面貌，从多方面作出了巨大努力，取得了积极成果。
For more than 40 years since the People's Republic was founded, the Chinese government has made positive achievements in its effort to narrow the gap, promote social development and bring about a change for the better in the backward minority areas.

计划生育与人权保护
 Family Planning and Protection Of Human Rights
　　中国政府根据宪法的规定推行计划生育，以促进经济和社会的发展，提高人民的生活水平，提高人口素质，维护人民享受更好的生活的权利。
The Chinese government implements a family planning policy in the light of the Constitution, with the aim of promoting economic and social development, raising people's living standards, enhancing the quality of its population and safeguarding the people's rights to enjoy a better life.
　　中国是世界上人口最多的发展中国家。
China is a developing country with the biggest population in the world. 

中国实行计划生育取得了举世公认的巨大成就。
It is universally acknowledged that China has achieved tremendous successes in family planning.

计划生育在坚持以宣传教育为主的同时，政府也采取一些必要的经济和行政的措施作为辅助手段。
At the same time, the government has adopted some necessary economic and administrative measures as supplementary means. 
无论是经济的还是行政的限制措施，都是在法律的范围内进行的，其最终目的仍然是为了教育。
These measures are all adopted in keeping with the law, and with the ultimate aim of persuasion.

中国实行计划生育，一贯坚持以避孕为主，保护妇女和儿童的健康。
The family planning program puts contraception first, to protect the health of women and children.
政府大力普及避孕节育的科学知识，向需要避孕节育的育龄夫妇提供安全、有效、方便、经济的避孕药具和节育技术。
The government has made great efforts to spread scientific knowledge of contraceptive practices, and to provide couples of child-bearing age who do not want child with safe, efficacious, simple and inexpensive contraceptives and the choice of a birth-control operation.
现在全国育龄夫妇采取各种避孕措施的人数约占75%左右。
At present, about 75 percent of the couples of child-bearing age throughout the country are resorting to various kinds of contraceptive practices.
政府坚决反对任何形式的强制堕胎，人工流产也只是作为避孕失败的补救措施，在自愿和安全可靠的条件下进行。
All forms of forced abortion are resolutely opposed. Artificial abortion, only as a remedy for contraception failure, is performed on a voluntary basis and with guarantee of safety.
中国在人口出生率已明显下降的情况下，每年的出生和人工流产的比例相当于目前世界各国的中等水平。
In a situation of a notably lower birthrate, the ratio of annual births to artificial abortions is about the medium level in the current world.

控制人口增长数量和提高人口素质，是中国人口政策的两个方面。
China's population policy has two objectives: control of population growth and improvement in quality of the population. 

溺弃女婴是封建社会遗留下来的恶习，现在这种现象在中国已大大减少，但在个别偏僻的地方还未根绝。
Drowning or abandoning female infants, a pernicious practice left over from feudal society, occurs much less often now, but has not been stamped out entirely in some remote areas.
中国法律明确规定，禁止溺婴和其他残害婴儿的行为。
China's law clearly forbids the drowning of infants and other acts of killing them.
中国采取了切实措施并依法严格查处这类违法犯罪案件。
The government has adopted practical measures for handling these kinds of criminal offenses according to law.

残疾人的人权保障
 Guarantee of Human Rights For the Disabled

中国宪法规定，国家保障残疾人同健康人一样享有公民权利。
China's Constitution provides that the state guarantees that the disabled enjoy the same civic rights as the able-bodied. 

中国政府制定了保障残疾人权益的相应政策、条例和规定。
Chinese government has worked out specific policies, rules and regulations to protect the rights and interests of the disabled.
许多地方政府制定了给予残疾人优惠、扶助和照顾的具体规定。
Many local governments have adopted concrete measures to provide the disabled with preferential assistance, treatment and care.
为保障残疾公民的选举权和被选举权，中国选举法明确规定，因残疾不能写选票的，可以委托他信任的人代写。
To guarantee the right of the disabled to elect and to be elected, China's Electoral Law stipulates that those who are unable to write their vote may ask others whom they trust to write for them. 

国家采取优惠政策发展残疾人教育。
The state has a preferential policy in developing education for the disabled. 
中国财政部门设立特殊教育专项补贴经费。
China's financial departments provide subsidies for special education.
除对接受义务教育的残疾学生免收学费、设立助学金外，还设立了残疾人自学成才奖金，鼓励和扶持残疾青年自学成才。
Apart from tuition-fees exemption and scholarships for the disabled students receiving compulsory education, there are also prizes to encourage and support self-taught disabled youths.

政府和残疾人联合会十分注意采取各种方法消除对残疾人的歧视与偏见，形成尊重和帮助残疾人的社会环境。
The government and the Disabled Persons' Federation have paid attention to eliminating discrimination against and prejudice toward the disabled. Great efforts have been made to create a social environment in which the disabled are respected and helped.

中国积极参与国际社会保障残疾人权益的活动。
China has actively participated in the international community's efforts to secure the rights and interests of the handicapped.

积极参与国际人权活动
 Active Participation in International Human Rights Activities

中国承认和尊重联合国宪章保护和促进人权的宗旨与原则，赞赏和支持联合国普遍促进人权和基本自由的努力，并积极参与联合国人权领域的活动。
China recognizes and respects the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations related to the protection and promotion of human rights. It appreciates and supports the efforts of the UN in promoting universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, and takes an active part in UN activities in the human rights field.
中国主张相互尊重国家主权，优先维护广大发展中国家人民的生存权和发展权，从而为全世界广大人民享受各项人权创造必要条件。
China advocates mutual respect for state sovereignty and maintains that priority should be given to the safeguarding of the right of the people of the developing countries to subsistence and development, thus creating the necessary conditions for people all over the world to enjoy various human rights.
中国反对借口人权问题干涉别国内政，并为消除各种不正常现象、加强国际人权合作进行了不懈的努力。
China is opposed to interfering in other countries' internal affairs on the pretext of human rights and has made unremitting efforts to eliminate various abnormal phenomena and strengthen international cooperation in the field of human rights.

中国积极参与联合国人权领域的活动。
China has taken an active part in the UN activities in the sphere of human rights.

中国积极参与了联合国系统内国际人权法律文书的起草和制定工作。
China has taken an active part in drafting and formulating international legal instruments on human rights within the UN.
中国一直是人权委员会关于发展权问题决议的共同提案国。
China has always been a cosponsor country of the Human Rights Commission's resolution on the right to development.

中国重视发展权问题。
China pays close attention to the issue of the right to development.
中国认为，随着历史的发展，人权的概念及其内涵也在不断发展。
China believes that as history develops, the concept and connotation of human rights also develop constantly.

中国主张在相互理解、求同存异的基础上加强人权领域内的国际合作。
China is in favor of strengthening international cooperation in the realm of human rights on the basis of mutual understanding and seeking a common ground while reserving differences

现在，世界新旧格局正处于转换之中，世界更加动荡不定。
There is now a change over the world pattern from the old to the new, and the world is more turbulent than before.
霸权主义和强权政治仍在继续，危及世界的和平与发展。
Hegemonism and power politics continue to exist and endanger world peace and development.
利用人权干涉别国内政和推行强权外交，阻碍了人权和基本自由的实现。
Interference in other countries' internal affairs and the pushing of power politics on the pretext of human rights are obstructing the realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
面对这样的国际形势，中国愿意同国际社会一道，为建立一个公正、合理的国际关系新秩序，实现联合国维护和促进人权与基本自由的宗旨，继续作出不懈的努力。
In face of such a world situation, China is ready to work with the international community in a continued and unremitting effort to build a just and reasonable new order of international relations and to realize the purpose of the United Nations to uphold and promote human rights and fundamental freedoms.

中国改造罪犯的状况
Criminal Reform in China 
中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China
一九九二年八月·北京
August 1992, Beijing

目录
Contents
前言
Foreword

中国改造罪犯的基本原则
China's basic principles of criminal reform
     依法保障罪犯的权利
Guaranteeing the rights of criminals
    对罪犯的劳动改造
 Reform of criminals through labour
    对罪犯的法制、道德、文化和技术教育
 Legal, moral, cultural and technical education of criminals
    对罪犯的感化
 Changing criminals through methods of persuasion
    对罪犯的依法文明管理
 Humane handling of prisoners in accordance with the law
    对罪犯的刑罚执行
 Carrying out the punishment of criminals
    对刑满释放人员的就业安置与教育保护
 Employment, resettlement, education and protection for convicts who have served their term and been released

前　言
Foreword
　　同犯罪现象作斗争，是当代世界各国共同面临的重大社会问题；将罪犯改造成为守法公民，是社会文明与进步的重要任务。
Combating crime is a major social issue confronting every country in the modern world. Reforming criminals into lawabiding citizens is important for the survival of a civilization and the advancement of a society.
　　中国有11亿人口，是世界上人口最多的国家。
With a population of 1.1. billion, China is the most populous country in the world. 
依照法律惩罚和改造罪犯，在中国仍然是一项艰巨的工作。
The lawful punishment and reform of criminals remains an arduous task in China.
中国改造罪犯的工作取得了巨大的成就。
China has been hugely successful in efforts to reform its criminals.
中国在长期的实践中，确立了改造罪犯的原则、政策和法律，这是社会主义法制建设的一项重要内容。
China has set up its system of principles, policies and laws for the reform of criminals based on many years of experience, representing an important step in the development of a socialist legal system.
把中国改造罪犯的情况介绍出来，将有利于世界公众更好地了解具有中国特色的社会主义。
This introductory look at criminal reform in China should help the people of the world better understand our socialist system with Chinese characteristics.
中国改造罪犯的基本原则
China's Basic Principles of Criminal Reform
人是可以改造的。
People can be reformed. 
绝大多数罪犯也是可以改造的。
The great majority of criminals can also be reformed. 
把消极因素化为积极因素，把罪犯改造成为有利于社会的人，这是符合马克思主义解放全人类的伟大理想的。
Turning minuses into pluses and changing criminals into people who are useful to society are in conformity with the great Marxist ideal of liberating all of mankind. 
根据这一认识，中国对于罪犯不是单纯进行惩罚，而着重于改造和转化。
Consistent with this understanding, China does not simply punish criminals; instead it emphasizes reform and change for the better. 
因而中国对于罪犯，即使是罪行严重的罪犯，历来坚持实行少杀的法律和政策。
Therefore, even in the case of criminals who have committed serious offenses, China has always adhered to its laws and policies, which call for a minimum number of executions.
中国在改造罪犯的实践中注意贯彻人道主义的原则。
In the actual practice of criminal reform, China pays close attention to implementing the principles of humanitarianism. 
对罪犯不仅保障应有的生活条件，更尊重人格，禁止侮辱。
Criminals are not only provided with proper living conditions, but their human dignity is also respected. 
中国法律对罪犯在服刑期间应享受合乎人道的物质生活待遇和监狱、劳改场所管理人员必须对罪犯实行文明管理，都作了明确的规定。
Humiliating of prisoners is forbidden. Chinese law clearly stipulates that criminals are to be provided with a humane level of material comfort during their prison terms and that the staff in prisons and reform-through-labour institutions must handle criminals in a civilized manner.

中国严格保障罪犯应有的权利。中国法律规定了罪犯在服刑期间未被法律限制的各项公民权利。从罪犯收押，到刑满释放整个过程，对罪犯应享有的权利，都有具体的法律规定。中国法律禁止监管工作人员虐待被监管人的行为，被监管人也依法享有控告的权利。对监管工作人员的渎职犯罪，法律明确规定应给予刑事制裁。
China strictly protects the due rights of criminals. Chinese law stipulates the various civil rights not restricted by law to which a criminal is entitled during a prison term. There are specific legal provisions concerning the rights a criminal must enjoy during the entire process from initial detention to release after serving the sentence. Chinese law forbids any maltreatment of prisoners by the prison staff and prisoners have the right to file charges according to the law. The law clearly stipulates criminal sanctions for any prison staff guilty of dereliction of duty.
　　中国对罪犯的改造贯彻以教育为主的原则。为了对罪犯实行改造，中国十分重视通过劳动和法制、道德、文化、技术教育，促使罪犯从被迫服刑转向自觉改造，摒弃以罪恶手段达到个人欲望的思想，树立尊重别人、爱护社会的观念，获得劳动就业技能，成为遵纪守法的公民。
In the reform of criminals, China operates on the principle that education is very important, attaching great importance to physical labour in addition to legal, moral, cultural and technical education to encourage criminals to stop looking at time in prison as a forced prison term and think more in terms of conscientious reform, to give up the idea of obtaining personal gain through criminal means, to form the habit of respecting other people and society in general, and to obtain the work skills needed for later employment so that they may become law-abiding citizens.
　　中国注重对罪犯的感化工作。为此，在对罪犯的改造中，中国实行国家专门机关与社会相结合的办法。对罪犯的改造工作主要由国家的劳动改造机关承担，在监狱、劳改场所执行。同时，在中国社会主义制度下，改造罪犯的工作得到全社会的广泛关注与大力支持。社会各部门、各阶层对改造罪犯工作的支持和配合，贯穿在对罪犯改造的全过程，并且延续到罪犯刑满释放后的安置和就业。
China attaches great importance to helping criminals change by means of persuasion. Therefore, China brings the efforts of specialized state organs and society together to reform criminals. Reforming criminals is mainly the responsibility of state organs in charge of reform-through-labour programmes and is carried out at prisons and reform- through-labour institutions. At the same time, under China's socialist system, reform of criminals is the common concern of society and receives energetic support from the public. Every sector and level of society supports and helps coordinate this work through the entire process of criminal reform, including resettlement and employment after a criminal has served his term and is released from prison.
由于上述原则的贯彻，中国改造罪犯的实践取得了显著的成就：
Due to the implementation of the above-mentioned principles, China has met with great success in criminal reform.

中国成功地改造了战争罪犯。中国对日本侵华战犯，伪满洲国战犯，国民党战犯，乃至封建清王朝的末代皇帝，没有一人被判处死刑。经过改造，一千多名原日本战犯经宽大释放回国后，绝大多数积极参加反战、和平和促进中日友好的活动；伪满洲国战犯和国民党的战犯，其中包括末代皇帝溥仪，经特赦释放后，成为守法公民并且为国家和人民尽力作了一些贡献。
China has successfully reformed war criminals. It did not use capital punishment on any of the Japanese war criminals, the war criminals of the puppet Manchuria regime, the Kuomintang war criminals or on the last emperor of the feudal Qing Dynasty. After their reform, over one thousand Japanese war criminals received lenient treatment and were returned to Japan. Most of them have taken an active part in anti-war activities, supporting peace and promoting Sino-Japanese friendship. After receiving special pardons and being released, the war criminals associated with the puppet Manchuria regime and the Kuomintang war criminals, including the last Qing Emperor, Aisin Giorro Pu Yi, became law-abiding citizens and did their best to work for the good of the country and the people.

中国是世界上重新犯罪率最低的国家之一，多年来一直保持在6%至8%的水平；而西方一些发达的国家的重新犯罪率，少则20%、30%，有些高达50%、60%以上。
China's rate of recidivism is among the lowest in the world. For many years, it has been around 6% to 8%. In contrast, the rate of recidivism in some developed western countries is around 20% or 30% with some going as high as 50%, 60% and more.
中国每年经法院审判的犯罪案件约有40余万件，刑事案件的年发案率为2‰左右，是世界上最低的国家之一。
About 400,000 criminal cases are brought to trial every year in China. The country's crime incidence rate among the population is about 2 per thousand per year, which is among the lowest in the world.

重新犯罪率和刑事案件发案率的高低，都是衡量一个国家改造罪犯成效的主要标志。中国改造罪犯的这些成就，证明了中国改造罪犯的原则与政策、法律与制度的正确。
The rate of recidivism and the crime rate are the main criteria for judging the effectiveness of a country's efforts to reform criminals. China's success in the reform of criminals proves that its principles and policies, as well as its laws and system are correct for handling the reform of criminals.

中国是发展中国家，中国改造罪犯的条件和环境还受到经济和社会发展水平的限制。
China is a developing country and the conditions and environment for criminal reform in China are still restricted by its level of economic and social development. 
随着中国社会主义现代化建设的发展和法制建设的不断完善，中国改造罪犯的工作将达到新的水平。
With progress in its socialist modernization drive and constant improvement in its legal system, the country's efforts to reform criminals will reach new heights of success.
依法保障罪犯的权利　
 Guaranteeing the Rights of Criminals 
　　中国法律规定，罪犯的服刑期间应有的权利受到保护，不容侵犯。
According to Chinese law, a criminal's due rights during his or her prison service are protected and may not be violated.
　　在半封建、半殖民地的旧中国，监狱是封建、官僚、买办阶级屠杀、残害革命者和被压迫人民的工具。
In the semi-feudal, semi-colonial China of the past, prisons were tools of the feudal, bureaucratic and comprador classes who used them to persecute and slaughter revolutionaries and the oppressed people. 
四十年代，美蒋特务在中国重庆的渣滓洞、白公馆对革命志士任意施以酷刑和秘密处死的残暴罪行，中国人民至今仍记忆犹新。在旧中国，即使是普通刑事犯人，他们的待遇也是十分恶劣的。
In the 1940s, special agents sent by America and Chiang Kaishek savagely tortured and secretly murdered revolutionaries in Zhazidong and Baigongguan prisons near Chongqing. These atrocities remain fresh in the minds of the Chinese people even today. In those days even petty criminals were treated very cruelly. 
新中国成立以后，人民政府建立了新型的社会主义监狱，把犯人当人看待，尊重他们的人格，保证罪犯的人身安全，给予充分的人道主义待遇。
After the founding of the People's Republic, the people's government established a new type of socialist prison, where the prisoners are regarded as human beings, and where their dignity is respected, their personal safety is ensured and where they receive fully humane treatment.
　　根据中国现行法律，罪犯在关押期间主要享有下列权利：
In accordance with the current laws of China, the main rights of criminals while they are in custody include the following.
　　罪犯对人民法院的判决有申诉的权利，1990年和1991年，中国法院各受理这类申诉4万余件；罪犯在服刑期间被指控又犯新罪，有权在刑事诉讼过程中为自己辩护或委托他人代理辩护。
In response to decisions made by the people's courts, criminals now have the right to appeal. In 1990 and 1991, more than 40,000 such appeals were accepted and heard in Chinese courts. A criminal accused of having committed a crime during his prison service has the right to defend himself or ask someone else to defend him during the legal proceedings.
　　罪犯有在任何情况下人格不受侮辱、人身安全不受侵犯的权利。对监管工作人员刑讯逼供、体罚虐待等违法行为，罪犯有向人民检察院、人民法院、人民政府或其他机构揭发和控告的权利。
Criminals have the right to protection against assault on their human dignity or personal safety under all circumstances. In response to any illegal action on the part of a warden or guard, such as obtaining a confession by torture, administering corporeal punishment or otherwise maltreating a prisoner, the victim has the right to appeal to the people's procuratorate, the people's court, the people's government or any other institution to expose and report such treatment.
　　没有被剥夺政治权利的罪犯，有依法行使选举的权利。
Criminals who have not been stripped of their political rights have the right to vote according to law.
　　罪犯有对监狱、劳改场所的管理、教育、劳动生产、文化娱乐、生活卫生等工作提出合理化建议的权利。
Criminals have the right to make reasonable suggestions concerning the management, the educational programme, production, recreational activities, or sanitary conditions of a prison or reform-through-labour institution.

罪犯有维持正常生活的权利，他们的吃、穿、住、用等物质生活条件由国家予以保障。
Criminals have the right to lead a normal life. The State guarantees material needs such as food, clothing, housing, etc. 
罪犯人均生活设施面积在5平方米以上，监舍力求坚固、整洁、保暖、通风。据统计，1990年，罪犯平均每人每月实际消耗粮食22.75公斤，蔬菜20至25公斤和相当数量的猪、牛、羊肉食及鱼、禽、蛋、豆等副食。罪犯每人每天从食品中摄取的热量为2952千卡。全国不同地区的罪犯年平均生活费650元左右，接近当地居民平均生活标准。
The average per capita living space for prisoners is over 5 square metres. Efforts are made to make all prison buildings solid, clean, well-insulated and well-ventilated. Statistics show that, the average prisoner consumed 22.75 kg of grain, 20-25 kg of vegetables and considerable amounts of pork, beef, mutton, fish, poultry, eggs and tofu in 1990. The average daily dietary intake of calories is 2952 Kcal per person. The annual average living expenses for a prisoner in different regions of the country is around 650 yuan, close to the average living standard of the local residents.
　　罪犯有维持身体健康的权利，罪犯享受免费医疗，每年定期接受健康检查，生病得到及时诊治。患有严重疾病的罪犯，有依法获得保外就医的权利。怀孕或正在哺乳自己婴儿的女罪犯，享受监外执行的待遇。对于患有疑难病症的罪犯，监狱、劳改场所均邀请社会上的医学专家会诊或送社会医院诊治。到目前为止，中国劳改系统已形成由省中心医院，监狱、劳改场所医院，基层医务室组成的三级医疗卫生网络，有各类卫生机构2944个；罪犯每千人拥有医师数为3.54，每千人拥有医院病床数为14.8，均高于全国平均水平。
Prisoners have the right to maintain good health. They enjoy free medical care and receive a regular medical checkup every year. If they become ill, prompt medical treatment is given. Criminals suffering from a serious disease have the right to get medical treatment outside the prison on bail according to law. A female prisoner who is pregnant or breast-feeding her baby may serve her sentence outside of prison. Someone who suffers from a difficult or complicated illness, may be seen by outside medical experts called in to make a joint diagnosis or may be sent to an outside hospital for treatment. Currently China has a three-tier medical network within the reform- through-labour system consisting of the provincial central hospital, the prison or reform-through-labour institution hospital and the basic clinic. Altogether there are 2,944 medical institutions of various kinds. There are 3.54 medical doctors and 14.8 hospital beds per thousand prisoners, with both rates higher than the national average for society as a whole.
　　罪犯有与亲友通信，定期接见亲属的权利。监狱、劳改场所设有专门接见室供罪犯与家属见面使用。罪犯与家庭产生误会或发生矛盾以至家属不来探视或中断通信联系时，劳改机关尽可能从中调解、疏通。
Prisoners have the right to exchange letters with their relatives and friends and to regularly meet with family members. Prisons and reform-through-labour institutions have special reception rooms where prisoners can meet with their family members. When some misunderstanding or conflict causes a prisoner's friends and relatives to stop visiting or writing, an organ of the reform-through-labour institution does its best to reconcile them.
　　罪犯有受教育的权利。中国劳改机关为罪犯受教育创造了必要的条件，罪犯可以根据自己的文化程度接受正规的小学、初中教育，有条件的还可接受高中及高等教育。同时还可受到职业培训，为回归社会、自食其力打下基础。罪犯可以阅读报刊书籍、听广播、看电视，了解国内外大事，与外部社会保持一定联系。
Criminals have the right to an education. China's reform- through-labour institutions have set up the facilities necessary for the education of their prisoners, who receive a regular primary or junior secondary education according to their individual educational backgrounds. A prisoner with a more advanced background may receive a senior secondary or college education. A prisoner may receive vocational training, laying the foundation for supporting himself or herself with his or her own hands on return to society. They are allowed to read books, newspapers and magazines, listen to the radio and watch TV, in order to learn about major domestic and international events and maintain a certain amount of contact with society outside the prison.
　　罪犯有信仰宗教的权利。中国政府允许信教的罪犯在押期间保持原有的宗教信仰。
Criminals have the right to believe in a religion. The Chinese Government permits prisoners who are so inclined to maintain their original religious beliefs while in custody.
　　罪犯享有财产、继承等方面的民事权利。罪犯入狱前的合法财产，依法受到保护，罪犯有行使收益、处分的权利。罪犯依法享有继承权。罪犯在服刑期间的发明权、著作权，均受法律保护。罪犯有提出离婚的起诉权和不同意离婚的答辩权。
Criminals enjoy certain civil rights, including property and inheritance rights. Property which was lawfully obtained before a criminal's imprisonment is protected under the law. A convicted criminal has the right to collect his earnings and dispose of his property. Criminals have the right of inheritance under the law. A prisoner's rights to a patent or copyright obtained during a prison term are protected by law. Prisoners also have the right to sue for divorce and the right to fight a divorce action in court.
　　中国政府对未成年犯、女犯、老弱病残罪犯以及少数民族罪犯、外籍罪犯，在充分考虑他们的生理、心理、体力和生活习惯等方面特点的前提下，在生活、管理、劳动等方面给予不同于其他罪犯的特殊待遇。未成年犯关押在少年管教所。少管所贯彻“以教育改造为主，轻微劳动为辅”的方针，劳动属于习艺性质。监狱、劳改场所为有特殊饮食习惯的少数民族罪犯设有专门食灶。
The Chinese Government provides special treatment which is different from the general prison population in terms of daily activities, administration, labour requirements, etc. to juvenile, female, elderly, infirm and disabled prisoners in addition to minority nationality Chinese and foreign prisoners in full consideration of this group's special physical and psychological traits, physical strength limitations and daily customs. Juveniles are kept in juvenile deliquent rehabilitation centres which operate on the principle of "relying mainly on reform through education supplemented by light physical labour," which is actually a kind of vocational study. Prisons and reform-through-labour institutions have special dining rooms for minority nationality prisoners with special dietary customs.
　　罪犯在服刑期间表现好的有获得依法减刑、假释的权利。
A prisoner may have his sentence reduced for good behaviour or be released on parole according to law.
　　为了保障罪犯的合法权利，中国的立法机关和政府制订了相应的法律和规定；监管工作人员必须经过专门的法律和业务知识的培训，合格后方能上岗工作；严禁对罪犯施加酷刑、侮辱和打骂虐待。如果发生体罚虐待罪犯的违法行为，要严肃处理，直至追究刑事责任，即依照中国刑法的规定，对于体罚虐待罪犯情节严重构成体罚虐待被监管人罪的，由人民法院依法判处刑罚。1990年和1991年共有24名监管工作人员因此被判处有期徒刑。人民检察院在监狱、劳改场所设立常驻检察机构，对劳改机关的执法活动进行监督，依法保障罪犯的申诉权、控告权和检举权；各级人大代表、政协委员不定期视察监狱、劳改场所，检查执法情况。如1991年，全国政协、北京市政协共有30余位委员，先后4次视察北京市第一监狱，检查那里的执法工作情况。
The legislative bodies and the government of China have drawn up appropriate laws and regulations to protect the legal rights of prisoners. Wardens and guards must receive special legal and vocational training, then be certified before taking a post. It is strictly forbidden to torture, insult or otherwise maltreat prisoners. Cases of unlawful administering of corporeal punishment are thoroughly prosecuted, including making an investigation to affix blame for the crime. In other words, in accordance with the provisions of the criminal law of China, a serious case of illegal corporeal punishment of a prisoner which constitutes "administering unauthorized corporeal punishment to a detainee" is tried in the people's courts, where any penalty is also decided. In 1990 and 1991, there was a total of 24 wardens and guards sentenced to imprisonment for this crime. The People's Procuratorate has sent permanent teams to prisons and reform-through-labour institutions to supervise the law-enforcement activities of these institutions and protect, according to law, the prisoners' right to appeal, right to make accusations and right to report unlawful activities. Deputies of the people's congresses and members of the committees of the political consultative conference at all levels visit the prisons and reform-through-labour institutions from time to time to check on law enforcement there. For example, in 1991 more than 30 members, composing four groups, from the National Committee of the Political Consultative Conference and the Beijing Municipal Committee of the Political Consultative Conference visited the No.1 Prison in Beijing to inspect the law enforcement work being carried out there.
　　与此同时，罪犯必须履行法律所规定的义务，这些义务是：遵守国家的法律法规和劳改机关统一制订的监规纪律；服从监管工作人员的管理教育；积极参加生产劳动；接受思想、文化、技术教育；爱护国家财产，保护公共设施；讲究文明礼貌，遵守社会公德；检举违法犯罪活动；增强组织纪律性，参加集体活动；联系犯罪实际，按受改造等。
At the same time, prisoners must fulfill their obligations under the law. These include: to abide by the laws and decrees of the State and the prison regulations and rules of discipline jointly drawn up by all the reform-through-labour institutions; to accept supervision and education from the wardens and other personnel; to actively participate in productive labour; to accept ideological, cultural and technical education; to take proper care of state property and protect public facilities; to behave in a civilized manner, be polite and observe common courtesy; to report criminal offenses; to become more self-disciplined and take part in group activities; to reform, bearing in mind the nature of the crime.
对罪犯的劳动改造
 Reform of Criminals through Labour 
　　中国组织罪犯从事有益于社会的生产劳动，这是中国对罪犯实行惩办与改造相结合原则的重要内容。中国改造罪犯的实践证明，这一做法是卓有成效的。
China has criminals do productive and socially beneficial work, which is the main meaning of combining punishment and reform. China's experience in reforming criminals has shown that this measure is very effective.
　　从事有益于社会的生产劳动，对于罪犯有着特别而重要的意义。第一，通过生产劳动，使罪犯了解社会财富来之不易，可以培养其热爱劳动、习惯劳动的思想，树立“不劳动不得食”的观念，矫正好逸恶劳、贪图享受等恶习；同时在劳动中可以培养其社会责任感和遵纪守法的精神。第二，组织他们从事适宜的劳动，可以增强体质，保持健康，避免在单纯的监禁中，长年无所事事，导致他们心情压抑、意志消沉、精神颓废，甚至萌生逃跑、自杀和重新犯罪等念头。第三，通过生产劳动使罪犯尽可能地掌握一种或几种生产技能及知识，可以为刑满释放后的就业谋生创造条件。防止他们因恶习不改或生活无着落而重新犯罪。第四，组织罪犯从事与正常社会条件和形式相同或相近的劳动，可以培养罪犯与他人或社会组织的协调和合作精神，使之在回归社会后能够尽快地适应社会环境。
It is especially important for criminals to engage in productive and socially beneficial labour. Firstly, productive labour helps criminals realize that social wealth does not come easily, fosters a love for work and helps them become accustomed to it, instills the idea of "no work, no food" in their minds, and helps them overcome bad habits such as sloth, aversion to work and hedonism. At the same time, working gives them a sense of social responsibility and law abiding spirit in addition to improving self-discipline. Secondly, having prisoners engage in an appropriate form of labour enables them to stay physically fit, which helps to ward off depression, listlessness, demoralization and even thoughts of escape, suicide or further criminal activity, ideas which spring from the monotony of prison life over many years. Thirdly, productive labour enables prisoners to acquire productive skills and knowledge which make it possible for them to earn a living when they have served their sentence. This makes it unlikely they will return to crime because of lingering bad habits or lack of job skills. Fourthly, having the prisoners engage in labour in a situation and format similar to those of normal society helps to instill the habit of working and cooperating with others in an organization in society. This enables them to adapt to a normal social environment as quickly as possible when they are returned to society.
　　把劳动作为对罪犯进行改造的一种手段，是世界许多国家通常的做法。许多国家的法律以及联合国的文件都对组织囚犯从事生产劳动提出了明确的要求。
Using forced labour as a means to reform criminals is a common practice in many countries of the world. Explicit conditions have been stipulated in the laws of many countries and in UN documents concerning forcing criminals to engage in labour.
　　中国的法律规定，凡是有劳动能力的罪犯，必须参加劳动；经过医生检查没有劳动能力和不宜参加劳动的老、弱、病、残罪犯不参加劳动。据1990年的统计，不参加劳动的犯人约占10%左右。中国政府反对将劳动作为惩罚罪犯的手段，反对用繁重的劳动折磨、虐待罪犯。
China's law stipulates that all criminals who are able to work must participate in work activities. Those who are found to be unable to work by a doctor's examination or those who are old, infirm, disabled or otherwise unfit for work do not participate. According to statistics, about 10% of the prison population did not participate in labour in 1990. The Chinese Government opposes the use of labour as a means of punishing criminals, as well as the use of heavy labour as a means to maltreat prisoners.
　　将劳动作为改造罪犯的手段而不是作为惩罚罪犯的手段，在中国改造罪犯的实践中得到贯彻执行。
China faithfully practices the use of forced labour as a reform method rather than as a method for punishment.
　　中国对组织罪犯从事生产劳动作出了一系列法律规定，在劳动时间，节、假日的休息，粮油、副食品的供应以及劳动保护和保健等方面，享受与同类国营企业相同的待遇。
China has formulated a series of laws and decrees relating to putting prisoners to work in productive labour. Prisoners enjoy the same benefits as employees of state enterprises in terms of work hours, holidays, supply of food and edible oil, and occupational safety and health care.
　　通过教育手段使罪犯由开始的被迫劳动逐渐过渡到自觉劳动。罪犯刚入狱时，有的没有劳动习惯，有的鄙视劳动，因此参加生产劳动多少都带有被迫的性质。对此，中国劳改机关不是采取粗暴的强迫手段，而是反复对罪犯进行从事生产劳动意义的教育，说明鄙视劳动的可耻，并在劳动的安排上，从他们力所能及的劳动开始，逐渐使他们提高对劳动的认识，培养对劳动的兴趣，从而逐渐过渡到自觉参加劳动改造。中国清王朝最后一个皇帝爱新觉罗·溥仪在转到中国监狱时连穿衣脱袜都要人服侍，通过中国监狱的耐心教育和细心安排后终于能够自觉地参加劳动改造。他认为，这对把他从一个罪犯改造成为有益于社会的人起到了很大的作用。
Education is used to gradually change the prisoners' attitudes to the work activity from forced labour to conscientious work. When they first arrive, some criminals are not in the habit of working, or look down on work, so at first they must be more or less forced to engage in productive labour. The reform-through-labour institutions of China do not resort to crude methods of force to solve this problem. Instead, prisoners are subjected to continual education to teach them the importance of taking part in productive labour and to help them realize that an aversion to labour is shameful. From the beginning, they are given work which is within their ability to reform so that they gradually come to understand the meaning of work and develop an interest in it so that they eventually come to participate in reform through labour of their own free will. Take the last Emperor of China's Qing Dynasty Aisin Giorro Pu Yi as an example. When he first arrived at a Chinese prison, he was attended by people who put on and took off his clothes, including his socks, for him. Eventually, he began to willingly participate in work activities thanks to the patient education and careful arrangements found in Chinese prisons. He said he believed that the work activities played a major role in changing him from a criminal into a person who was beneficial to society.
　　中国劳改机关除对不适宜参加生产劳动的罪犯免除劳动外，监管工作人员还随时调查、了解罪犯的身体状况，安排与罪犯身体承受能力相适应的劳动。女犯参加适合其生理、心理特点的劳动。少年犯只安排习艺性的劳动，实行半天劳动、半天学习的制度。
In Chinese reform-through-labour institutions, a prisoner who is unable to work is exempted from productive labour. Prison staff are assigned to determine the prisoner's state of health so work can be found which the prisoner is physically able to do. Female criminals perform work which is in conformity with women's physical and psychological traits. Juvenile deliquents only work to learn skills, following a half-work and half-study schedule.
　　在劳动改造中，为罪犯提供文明、安全的劳动条件。在劳动保护和保健方面，中国每一个监狱、劳改场所都建有专门的安全制度和必要的安全设施，并配有专门的安全员经常进行监督、检查。监狱、劳改场所的安全、卫生、通风、光线等条件，都有明确的规定，并纳入劳改机关的工作考核内容之中。
Civilized and safe working conditions are provided for prisoners engaging in reform through labour. In the area of occupational safety and health care, every reform-through-labour institution has a set of specific safety regulations and necessary safety measures plus special safety personnel who constantly monitor safety conditions and conduct inspections. There are explicit regulations relating to conditions in prisons and reform-through-labour institutions in terms of safety, hygiene, ventilation, light, etc.. Reform-through-labour institutions in China are judged in part by how well they conform to these regulations.
　　中国强调要让罪犯在劳动改造中学会和提高生产技能，使罪犯看到重新做人的希望，将罪犯改造成为对现代化建设有用的新人。帮助罪犯学会和提高生产技能是中国劳改机关的一个重要考核指标。这对绝大部分罪犯在刑满释放之后都能够迅速就业，安心工作，避免重新犯罪起了重要作用。
China insists that criminals be allowed to study and improve their production skills to make the prisoner look at the world in a new light and enable the reformed criminal to contribute to the modernization programme. One major way of judging a reform-through-labour institution is how successful it is in helping criminals learn and improve their production skills. This has played an important role in enabling reformed criminals to quickly become employed, keep their minds on their work and avoid going back.
　　对有一技之长的罪犯，中国劳改机关鼓励他们发挥特长为社会作出贡献。在中国，罪犯在管理部门的帮助下成为技术能手、生产骨干的事例是相当多的，成为发明家、艺术家的也不乏其例。河北省第一监狱罪犯毛某在劳动改造中创造了三项重要发明，并获得了国家的专利，受到了社会的好评，同时得到依法减刑的奖励。
Chinese reform-through-labour institutions encourage criminals who have special skills to contribute to society. In China, there have been a considerable number of criminals who became skilled workers or even key personnel in production through the assistance of administrative departments. Some have even become inventors and artists. One criminal named Mao in the First Prison of Hebei Province has made three major inventions and holds Chinese patent rights for them, winning public approval and a reduced sentence for himself in accordance with the law.
　　四十多年来，中国对罪犯的劳动改造在实践中创造了许多有益的经验。许多在押罪犯在劳动改造的过程中除掉了入狱前的恶习，树立了正确的人生观，培养了尊重他人、尊重社会、遵纪守法的良好习惯。许多罪犯由于在劳动改造过程中表现突出，依法获得减刑、假释；一些罪犯在刑满释放回归社会后，成为企业的生产骨干、工程师、厂长、经理，有些还当上了先进生产者、劳动模范。中国在劳动改造罪犯中的这些成绩受到了国际社会中有识之士客观公正的评价和称赞。
Over the past forty years, China has gained a great deal of valuable experience in reforming criminals through labour. Many prisoners have rid themselves of their bad habits through reform through labour, formulated a better outlook on life and learned to respect other people and society, and now maintain self-discipline and abide by the law. Many have had their sentence reduced or been released on parole for outstanding behaviour during the reform-through-labour process. Some who have returned to society after serving their sentence have become key production personnel, engineers, factory directors and managers. A few have even become "advanced producers" or "model workers". China's success in reforming criminals through labour has been justly praised by respected personages of great vision in the international community.
　　在中国，组织罪犯生产劳动所生产的产品主要是满足中国劳改系统内部的需要，只有一部分通过正常的渠道进入国内市场。劳改中的生产收入主要用于改善犯人的生活，维持再生产和完善其他与犯人有关的集体生活设施。这对减轻国家和人民的负担起了很好的作用。中国劳改系统的生产分两部分，一部分是罪犯劳动改造的生产，另一部分是劳改系统的工人、家属从事的生产。这两个部分是性质完全不同的，不能混淆。据1990年统计，中国劳改系统罪犯生产的年产值仅25亿元人民币，约占当年国家工农业生产总值的0.8‰。近些年来，西方一些人宣扬“中国劳改生产是中国国民经济的支柱”，与事实完全不符。
In China, products are produced by prison labour mainly to meet needs occurring within the reform-through-labour system. Only a small proportion of such products enter the domestic market through normal channels. Profit from reform- through-labour work activities is mainly used for improving the prisoners' living conditions, upgrading their common living areas and facilities and maintaining production. This has played a positive role in reducing the burden on the state and the people. There are two kinds of production in the reform- through-labour system: one is that carried out by the prisoners themselves; and the other is that carried out by the workers and their dependents in the reform-through-labour institutions. These two kinds of production are totally different in nature and should not be confused. According to statistics, the annual output value of prison labour in the reform-through-labour system for 1990 was only 2.5 billion yuan, which is about 0.08 per cent of the nation's total industrial and agricultural production output value for the year. In recent years some people in the West have been claiming that "China's prison products constitute the pillar of the Chinese national economy." Nothing could be further from the truth.
　　中国禁止劳改产品出口。中国的主管部门从来没有批准给予任何劳改单位以出口商品的经营权。1991年10月10日，中国经贸部、司法部又联合发出《关于重申禁止劳改产品出口的规定》。中国政府在这方面的做法是严肃的、认真的，对违反规定的，一经发现，即严肃处理。
China prohibits export of products made with prison labour. No competent Chinese authorities has ever given any reform-through-labour unit the right to export commodities. On October 10, 1991, the Ministry of Economic Relations and Foreign Trade and the Ministry of Justice jointly issued a circular entitled "Reissue of Regulations Prohibiting the Export of Products Made in a Reform-through-labour Programme". The Chinese Government is very strict on this point and any violations of these regulations are dealt with severely.
对罪犯的法制、道德、文化和技术教育
 Legal, Moral, Cultural and Technical Education of Criminals 
　　中国法律规定，罪犯的劳动改造必须同法制、道德、文化、技术教育结合起来。罪犯一般年纪较轻，文化程度偏低，法律意识差，这使得帮助罪犯摆脱愚昧，增强法律意识和道德观念，提高文化水平和劳动技能，成为改造工作的重要任务。为此，中国劳改机关在实践中创造了开办特殊学校这一具有中国特色的改造罪犯的形式。
Chinese law stipulates that the reform of criminals through labour should be combined with legal, moral, cultural, and technical education. Since most criminals are young, without much education and legally ignorant, an important part of the work of reform-through-labour is helping the prisoners become better educated and acquire more legal, moral and cultural awareness and working skills. To meet these objectives Chinese reform-through-labour institutions now run special schools, creating a criminal reform system with Chinese characteristics.
　　中国政府从1981年开始把在押罪犯的教育纳入国民教育计划，要求有条件的监狱、劳改场所均应设立专门的教育机构，建立完备的教育制度，使对罪犯的法制、道德、文化和技术教育正规化、系统化。截止1991年底，全国监狱、劳改场所已办成特殊学校的占总数的72.82%。
Since 1981 the Chinese Government has included education of criminals in its national educational programme. Where conditions permit, prisons and reform-through-labour institutions are required to set up special educational institutions to form a complete educational system for formal and institutionalized legal, moral, cultural, and technical education of prisoners. By the end of 1991, 72.82% of all prisons and reform-through-labour institutions had established such special schools.
　　劳改机关对罪犯进行法制、道德教育，重点是进行认罪服法、道德修养和人生观教育。目的是使罪犯知法、守法、服法和提高道德水平。
The legal and moral education of criminals in reform- through-labour institutions emphasizes the need to plead guilty, abide by the law, improve moral values and better one's outlook on life. The purpose is to help criminals know, abide by, and accept the law and to improve their moral standards.
　　法制教育主要是组织罪犯学习《宪法》、《刑法》、《刑事讼诉法》、《民法通则》、《民事诉讼法》等法律，以使其了解公民的基本权利和义务、犯罪的刑事责任等刑法的基本内容、刑事诉讼制度，以及关于婚姻、家庭、人身和财产权利等民事基本法律。在此基础上使他们分清合法与违法行为的界限、犯罪行为与非犯罪行为的界限，充分认识犯罪行为的危害性和法律责任，从而认罪服法，自觉接受改造。
Legal education for prisoners mainly consists of studying the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Criminal Law, Law of Criminal Procedure, General Provisions of the Civil Law, and "Code of Civil Law Procedures", etc. This enables them to learn the basic rights and obligations of a citizen, the legal consequences for committing a crime and the basic contents of the criminal law, the criminal justice system and the basic civil laws relating to marriage, family, rights of persons and property rights. On this basis, they should be able to draw a clear distinction between legal and illegal actions or criminal and non-criminal acts and become fully aware of the danger and legal consequences of criminal actions, so that they may admit their guilt, obey the laws and voluntarily accept reform.
　　道德和人生观教育主要是抓住与罪犯切身利益最为密切的问题，如理想、幸福、良知、苦乐、荣辱、前途、婚恋、家庭等问题，教育他们懂得什么是正确的社会公德和价值观念，从思想上划清光荣与耻辱、文明与野蛮、高尚与卑劣、美好与丑恶的界限。同时密切联系本人的情况，总结他们犯罪的教训，进行个别的、有针对性的教育，有效地转化罪犯的思想。
Education in morality and outlook on life focuses on issues which are closely related to a prisoner's immediate interests, such as his or her ideals, happiness, conscience, pleasure or sadness, honour or humiliation, future, marriage, family, etc., making them understand proper social morality and sense of value so that a prisoner can clearly distinguish honour from humiliation, civilized from uncivilized behaviour, noble from base actions, and beauty from ugliness. At the same time, individual and specific education is provided to suit individual cases and coordinate with the lessons learned from their criminal activities. This has proven effective in reforming the minds of criminals.
　　据1991年统计，罪犯中参加法制、道德教育的占98.92%。在贵州某劳改场所改造的罪犯梅某，服刑期间认真接受法制、道德教育，自觉地矫正自己的恶习，刑满释放后遵纪守法、靠劳动致富，受到群众的信任，当选为文明村的村长、乡人民代表、县政协委员。
According to statistics, 98.92% of all prisoners in China took part in legal and moral education in 1991. One prisoner in Guizhou named Mei, who took the legal and moral education seriously, overcame his bad habits during imprisonment. Since completing his sentence he has been well-behaved and law-abiding. He has prospered through his hard work and won the trust of the masses who elected him as the head of a model village, deputy to the township people's congress and member of the county committee of the political consultative conference.
　　对罪犯进行文化知识教育以扫盲和普及初中教育为主，同时鼓励文化程度较高的参加社会上开办的函授大学、业余大学、电视大学等学习。
Elimination of illiteracy and attainment of universal junior secondary education are the main objectives of cultural education in prisons, but criminals with a higher educational level are encouraged to attend correspondence colleges, part-time colleges or TV colleges offered by society.
　　为做好对罪犯的文化知识教育，中国劳改机关定期对罪犯的实际文化程度进行测验，分年级编班并设置与社会教育相应的课程。要求初中文化程度以下的罪犯一般都要参加文化学习。
Chinese reform-through-labour institutions regularly test the educational level of prisoners and prison students are divided into different grades and classes similar to the teaching programme in schools in society at large. Prisoners whose educational level is below the junior secondary school level are generally required to attend classes.
　　监狱、劳改场所设立的特殊学校的校长由监狱、劳改场所的主要负责人兼任，此外还设有教导主任、教研室，每个学期每个年段都有教学计划和教学大纲。罪犯每天学习2小时左右，每星期学习12课左右。特殊学校配有的专职教员中，有一些是从文化程度较高的罪犯中选任的。罪犯参加文化学习，经当地教育部门考试合格的，可获得与社会教育机构同等效力的学历证书。
The overall director of a prison or reform-through-labour institution also serves as the principal of the institution's special school. The school also has a dean and teachers' office plus a teaching programme and curriculum prepared each school term and year. Prisoners study about two hours a day or 12 hours a week. Teaching staff are especially selected for the school and some are chosen from among prisoners with a higher educational level. Prisoners who have attended classes and passed the tests given by the local educational department will be given educational certificates equivalent to those issued by educational institutions in the society at large.
　　据统计，1991年底，全国监狱、劳改场所共开办各种文化学习班1.2万余个，参加文化学习的罪犯达51.8万余人，入学率占应参加学习的92.35%，其中参加刊授大学、函授大学、业余大学、电视大学学习的5300余名，参加高等教育自学考试的4000余名。近6年来，获得各类文化结业、毕业证书的累计达90.2万余人次。山东省第三监狱在罪犯中开展正规文化教育三年，文盲比例由占罪犯总数的17.6%下降到1.3%，小学以下文化程度者由65%下降到5.3%，初中以上文化程度者有较大幅度的上升，刑满释放人员的重新犯罪率降至1.9%。沈阳市有一位青年，曾因参加盗窃集团被判刑，服刑期间，他认真接受改造，积极参加劳改场所组织的文化学习，出狱后不仅考上了大学，后来还考取了哈尔滨工业大学研究生，取得硕士学位。
According to statistics, at the end of 1991, there were over 12,000 classes of various kinds being offered at China's prisons and reform-through-labour institutions. Over 518,000 prisoners attended the classes and the 92.35% of those eligible to attend were admitted. There were 5,300 prisoners studying through classes offered in publications, correspondence colleges, part-time colleges, and TV colleges and 4,000 who took higher education examinations for self-study students. Over the last six years, prisoners have been awarded a total of 902,000 certificates or diplomas of various kinds. A three-year regular educational programme which has been instituted for prisoners in the Third Prison of Shandong Province has brought the illiteracy rate there down from 17.6% to 1.3%. In addition, the number of prisoners with less than a primary school education has dropped from 65% to 5.3% and the number of those who have a junior secondary education or above has increased substantially. Revidivism has dropped to 1.9%. There was once a youth from the city of Shenyang who was sentenced to reform-through-labour because of his involvement in a gang theft. While serving his sentence, he conscientiously accepted reform and actively participated in the classes organized by the reform-through-labour institution. After he was released from prison he passed his college entrance examination and later was even admitted as a postgraduate at Harbin Industrial University, where he obtained an MA degree.
　　技术教育是中国对罪犯实施教育改造的一项重要内容。据1991年统计，罪犯中已有56.1万余人参加各类技术培训班，占应接受技术教育犯人的83.18%。累计有54.6万余人次经社会劳动部门考核合格，获得技术等级证书。
Vocational education is a major part of the education programme for criminals in China. According to statistics, over 561,000 criminals took part in training courses for various skills in 1991, representing 83.18% of the total number of prisoners who were eligible. A total of 546,000 certificates for various levels of technical proficiency were issued to prisoners by the labour departments in society as a result of testing.
　　为了加强对罪犯的技术教育，监狱、劳改场所设有技术教研室、教室、实验室，农业单位设有试验田。对罪犯无偿提供各种技术教育的教材和资料。教员一般由劳改机关的工程技术人员和农艺师等担任，同时也根据需要邀请社会上的技术人员或院校的教师讲课。根据罪犯刑满后的不同去向和社会需要，重视开展一些实用性强、周期短、见效快的综合职业技术培训。如家用电器维修、剪裁缝纫、烹饪、理发、家禽饲养、木工、瓦工、电工、农具维修等，使罪犯在服刑期间掌握一种或几种技能，为刑满就业创造良好的条件。山东省济南某劳改场所对近几年学有专长的720名刑满释放人员进行了调查，其中有96%的人回归社会后很快被当地安置就业，有的回原单位工作，有的被社会企业聘为技术骨干，还有开办家庭副业、建筑业或其他服务行业，成为遵纪守法的个体户和专业户。辽宁省凌源某劳改场所对124名在监内取得技术等级证书的刑满释放人员进行调查，出狱后不仅全部有了工作，而且无一人重新犯罪。
To augment vocational training for prisoners, prisons and reform-through-labour institutions feature vocational teaching and research facilities, classrooms, laboratories and experimental plots set up by agricultural work units. Vocational teaching materials and various forms of reference material are provided free for the prisoners. Teachers are generally selected from among engineers, technicians and agricultural experts within the reform-through-labour institutions supplemented by technicians and teachers from schools or other institutions in society. Taking into account the social needs of prisoners who have been released plus the fact that they go in different directions, short, practical and immediately useful programmes are the main focus of vocational and technical training. Through courses which teach subjects such as home appliance repair, tailoring and sewing, cooking, hair-dressing, home poultry raising, carpentry, bricklaying, electricity and agricultural implement repair, prisoners acquire one or more skills during their imprisonment, in preparation for finding employment after their release. A study of 720 former prisoners with technical skills conducted by a reform-through-labour institution in Jinan, Shandong Province revealed that 96% found employment soon after returning to society. Some returned to their original work units and some were employed as key technical personnel inordinary enterprises. Still others set up household businesses, construction operations or other service industries, becoming individual business operators who behave themselves and abide by the law. A reform-through-labour institution in Lingyuan, Liaoning Province made a study 124 former inmates who had acquired technical proficiency certificates in prison. All of them had jobs and none had committed new crimes.
　　对罪犯进行系统的法制、道德、文化、技术教育，致力于把监狱、劳改场所办成教育人、改造人的特殊学校，这是中国劳动改造工作的一项重要改革，也是中国社会主义法制建设的新发展。实践证明，这是提高改造罪犯质量，促进社会治安良性循环的有效途径，已成为具有中国特色的一项司法制度。
The systematic legal, moral, cultural and technical education of criminals is intended to make prisons and reform- through-labour institutions like special schools for educating and reforming criminals. This represents an important improvement in reform-through-labour work in the country as well as a development in the construction of a socialist legal system in China. Experience has shown that it is an effective way to improve our work in reforming criminals and promotes a good social order. This policy has generated a systematic legal system with Chinese characteristics.
对罪犯的感化
 Changing Criminals through Methods of Persuasion 
　　对罪犯的感化是中国改造罪犯的重要内容。中国劳改机关主要采取了以下几种做法：
Changing criminals through methods of persuasion is an integral part of China's efforts to reform criminals, for which Chinese reform-through-labour institutions have generally adopted the following measures.
　　中国的监狱、劳改场所积极开展有益的文化、娱乐、体育活动，为在押罪犯创造一种积极向上的改造氛围。
Healthy cultural, recreational and sports activities are offered in China's prisons and reform-through-labour institutions to create a positive atmosphere for bringing about change in the prisoners.
　　监狱、劳改场所均设有图书室、阅览室，备有政治、文化、文学、科技等书籍和各类报刊，供罪犯阅读，同时允许罪犯自费订阅报纸、杂志。监狱、劳改场所还经常组织有学习能力的罪犯开展文艺创作、新闻写作、读书、演讲、征文比赛等活动。
All prisons and reform-through-labour institutions have libraries and reading rooms for prisoners with books concerning politics, culture, literature, and science and technology as well as a variety of newspapers and magazines which may also be ordered by a prisoner at his or her own expense. Prisons and reform-through-labour institutions often offer eligible prisoners the opportunity to engage in activities such as artistic creation, news writing, reading, lecturing and essay writing competitions.
　　相当多的监狱、劳改场所还组织罪犯参加学习书法、绘画等习艺性活动，配备了专门教师、画室、作画工具及原材料。有的还请社会上的教师到监狱指导。上海市监狱从1983年以来，每年举办一期在押罪犯的习美作品展，每次展出二、三百件。1990年秋，在北京的博物馆举办了有700多件由在押罪犯创作的美术作品展，内容涉及书法、篆刻、素描、油画、国画、水粉画、泥塑、石刻、玉雕、木雕、根雕、蜡染、刺绣、编织、剪纸等，在社会上引起了极大反响。
Many prisons and reform-through-labour institutions provide the prisoners with special teachers, painting rooms, and painting tools and materials and offer calligraphy, painting and other art classes. Some also invite teachers from society at large to give lectures at the prison. Shanghai Municipal Prison has held an exhibition every year since 1983, featuring 200-300 pieces of art created by prisoners. In autumn 1990, a museum in Beijing held an arts and crafts exhibition where over 700 pieces done by prisoners in calligraphy, seal cutting, sketching, oil painting, traditional Chinese painting, gouache, clay sculpture, stone carving, jade carving, wood carving, root carving, batik, embroidery, weaving, and paper cutting were displayed, which was well-received by the public.
　　不少监狱、劳改场所都有由罪犯组织的艺术团，自编自演文艺节目。有些还经常组织罪犯开展体育活动，举行篮球、乒乓球、拔河及各种棋类比赛。
Many prisons and reform-through-labour institutions have organized performing troupes made up of prisoners, who give performances produced by the criminals themselves. In some institutions sports activities such as basketball, table-tennis, and tug-of-war, in addition to various board games are often organized for the prisoners.
　　为活跃罪犯的生活，教育改造罪犯，中国的监狱、劳改场所办有“三报”：劳改报、黑板报、墙报。这些报由监管工作人员负责，由罪犯自己撰稿、编辑、抄写、刻印。目前，狱内劳改报的发行量为22.4万份。这些富有知识性、趣味性的监内报，被罪犯称为“改造路上的良师益友”。
As part of the effort to educate and reform criminals as well as to enliven their daily lives, China's prisons and reform-through-labour institutions publish three newspapers, the Reform-through-labour News, the Blackboard News and the Wall News. Though prison staff are responsible for these newspapers, prisoners do the writing, editing, copying and blockprinting. At present, the Reform-through-Labour Newspaper has a circulation of 224,000 within the prisons. These prison newspapers, which are interesting and full of information, are praised by the prisoners as "good teachers and helpful friends on the road to reform".
　　中国十分重视监管工作人员对在押罪犯的言传身教作用。
China sets great store by the beneficial effects which the personal examples and words of the prison staff have on the prisoners in their care.
　　中国要求监管工作人员具有较高的思想道德水准和文化知识，在日常工作中以其文明的言谈举止引导、启发罪犯。尤其是对青少年罪犯，要求监管工作人员要象父母对待子女、医生对待病人、教师对待学生那样真诚地、耐心地、细致地做好教育、感化、挽救工作。监管工作人员在做工作时，有时要找罪犯谈话上十次、几十次，甚至上百次，以关怀备至之情打动罪犯。罪犯在家庭、婚姻等方面遇有特殊困难，劳改机关与社会联系，尽力帮助解决。
The state requires all prison staff to be ideologically morally sound in order to guide and inspire the prisoners with their civilized speech and behaviour in their daily work. The prison staff need to work especially hard on the education, conversion and redemption of juvenile deliquents, working in a sincere, patient and painstaking manner like parents with children, doctors with patients and teachers with students. Sometimes, the prison staff have to talk to a prisoner ten, twenty or even a hundred times before their concern can move the prisoner. When prisoners have special family or marital problems, organs of the reform-through-labour institution do their best to help, working with relevant social organizations.
　　社会组织积极参与帮助、教育、感化罪犯的工作。
Organizations in society actively participate and help in reforming criminals through education and persuasion.
　　这是中国改造罪犯的一个重要特色。实践证明，这一做法是相当成功的，中国的各级党委、政府部门的领导人，人大代表、政协委员，工会、共青团、妇联和司法机关的负责人，社会知名人士、英雄、劳动模范，老干部、老教师、老工人、老艺术家等，到监狱、劳改场所给罪犯作报告，讲形势，谈理想，提希望，使罪犯感受温暖，看到光明前途。有的还组织受害者到监狱、劳改场所控诉犯罪的危害，使罪犯增加罪责感，进一步认罪悔罪。
This is one of the major characteristics of China's efforts to reform criminals and it has proven to be very successful in practice. Talks are given to criminals in prisons and reform- through-labour institutions by leaders of party committees and government departments; deputies of people's congresses; members of political consultative conference committees; responsible persons from the trade unions, the youth league, the women's league and judicial organs at all levels, and famous personalities, heroes, model workers, veteran cadres, senior teachers, workers and artists in society. They lecture on current affairs and ideals, raise the hopes of the criminals, make them feel as though people care about them and help them see that they have a bright future. Crime victims are also invited to come to prisons and reform-through-labour institutions to condemn the harm caused by crime to help enhance the criminals' sense of guilt and make them feel more responsible and repentant for their crimes.
　　劳改机关经常请已改造好的典型人物到监狱、劳改场所现身说法，这对增强在押罪犯的改造信心起了很好的作用。
Reform-through-labour institutions often invite model reformed prisoners who have turned their life around through reform to talk about their own experience. This plays a very positive role in building up the prisoners' confidence in reform.
　　劳改机关对改造表现比较好的罪犯，在可能的条件下，或组织他们到社会上参观学习，或节假日给假回家与亲人团聚，让他们了解社会的发展情况，使他们感到自己仍是社会的一员，争取尽早回到社会，参加国家的现代化建设。
When possible, reform-through-labour institutions arrange for prisoners who have shown good behaviour to go on a study tour of places of interest in society, or to have leaves during holidays for family reunions. This allows them to see how society is progressing and to feel that they are still members of society who should return as soon as possible to participate in the modernization drive of the country.
　　劳改机关积极发动在押罪犯的家属参与对罪犯的感化工作。
Reform-through-labour institutions actively encourage family members of prisoners to take part in the persuasion process.
　　监狱、劳改场所除执行正常的探监规定外，遇有罪犯思想波动时，邀请罪犯家属到监狱、劳改场所进行规劝。对来监探望罪犯的亲属，监管工作人员主动介绍罪犯的思想、表现，有时还组织参观罪犯监舍、劳动场所，请他们协助做罪犯的思想工作。
In addition to regular visits covered by the rules, prisons and reform-through-labour institutions sometimes set up special visits for family members of criminals who are not progressing steadily toward reform so that they can advise the troubled criminal. The prison staff informs the visiting relatives of the recent thinking and behaviour of the prisoner, occasionally showing them around the cells and work places and inviting them to help in the ideological remoulding of the criminals.
　　劳改机关对罪犯的感化，得到了多数罪犯真诚的响应。
The reform of criminals through persuasion by reform- through-labour institutions has received a sincere response from most prisoners.
　　1990年4月26日18时，6.9级强烈地震将青海省第十三劳改支队的建筑物瞬间震为废墟。因监房建筑较坚固，罪犯中无人死亡或重伤。在余震不断，没有照明的情况下，罪犯没有一人逃跑，而是积极投入到紧张的抢险救灾中，共救出职工及家属118人。事后，115名罪犯受到依法减刑、假释的宽大处理，169名罪犯受到记功、表扬。
On April 26, 1990, at 18:00 hours a severe earthquake of magnitude 6.9 quickly devastated most of the offices and dormitory buildings of the No.13 Reform-through-Labour Detachment in Qinhai. The buildings housing the prisoners were solidly built, so no prisoners were killed or seriously injured. In spite of the aftershocks and the fact that all the lights were out, not a single prisoner tried to escape. Instead, they began carrying out frantic relief work, rescuing 118 prison staff and family members. Afterwards, 115 prisoners had their sentences reduced or were released on parole, receiving favourable treatment in accordance with the law. Another 169 prisoners were cited or commended for meritorious service.
对罪犯的依法文明管理
 Humane Handling of Prisoners in Accordance with the Law 
　　中国监狱、劳改场所内的行政管理的基本原则是依法文明管理，即在管理活动中，尊重罪犯人格，给他们以人道主义待遇，坚决禁止有辱罪犯人格的做法，充分发挥管理在改造罪犯中的约束、矫治、激励和引导作用。
The basic principle governing management of prions and reform-through-labour institutions in China is humane handling of prisoners in accordance with the law. This means respecting the human dignity of prisoners and treating them humanely, resolutely forbidding prisoners to be humiliated and taking full advantage of the restraining, corrective, inspirational and guiding role of management in reforming criminals.
　　为了让新入狱的罪犯详细了解其法律地位和权利、义务，熟悉监区环境，为服刑改造奠定基础，新收押的罪犯都要送往入监队进行1至2月的监规纪律和有关法律、法规的学习，以消除新犯通常的消极对抗和恐惧心理，让其能够自然地与监管工作人员接触并交流思想。
Criminals are sent to an orientation programme when they first arrive at the prison to learn in detail their legal status, rights and obligations as well as to become familiar with the prison environment. During this one to two month programme, prisoners study prison regulations and code of conduct in addition to relevant laws and decrees, laying the groundwork for their reform. This helps to dispel the new prisoners' normal feelings of passive antagonism and dread and enables them to come in contact and discuss what is on their minds with prison staff in a natural way.
　　监狱、劳改场所内的行政管理涉及罪犯日常活动的各个方面，为了防止监管工作人员工作中的盲目性和随意性，规定了罪犯的日常行为准则和考核、奖惩的条件、程序等，并向罪犯公开宣布。监管工作人员的各项工作必须严格遵循这一法规。监管工作人员对罪犯的改造表现要进行记载，定期分析、汇总，对改造表现突出的及时给予表扬、记功，并在生活和监内活动等方面给予较优惠的待遇；对符合条件的，及时报请人民法院依法减刑或假释，以充分调动罪犯的改造积极性，在监内树立积极改造的风尚。
Management of prisons and reform-through-labour institutions involves each and every aspect of the daily activities of the prisoners. The criteria and procedures for assessing daily conduct and conditions for rewards and penalties for prisoners are codified and publicly promulgated in order to prevent arbitrary or capricious behaviour on the part of the prison staff in their work. Prison staff must abide by this code to the letter in all aspects of their work. They keep records of the prisoners' progress in reform, regularly analyzing and summarizing their records. They commend and record the merits of those who have made outstanding progress in reform-through-labour and grant them favoured treatment in their living conditions and activities within the prison. For prisoners who meet the requirements, their cases are reported to the People's Court, where their sentence may be commuted or they may be released on parole in accordance with the law. This encourages a positive attitude toward reform-through-labour among the prisoners and establishes a positive atmosphere for reform- through-labour in the prisons.
　　劳改机关要求监管工作人员深入了解罪犯的各项日常活动，组织罪犯劳动、学习，开展个别教育和谈心活动，重要节、假日还与罪犯共同进餐，参加罪犯的文娱、体育活动，使罪犯与监管工作人员之间形成彼此的情感联系和心理感应，尽可能消除罪犯与监管工作人员之间可能存在的排斥和消极对抗心理。这些管理措施是十分有效的，中国监狱、劳改场所很少发生罪犯袭击监管工作人员和破坏监管设施的事件。
Reform-through-labour institutions require the prison staff to maintain close track of all the day-to-day activities of the prisoners. They must organize work and study for, conduct classes for and have personal heart-to-heart talks with prisoners. They also have meals with them on major holidays and participate in recreational and sports activities with them, to establish emotional and intellectual ties. This contact goes as far as possible to dispel any feelings of aversion and repressed antagonism which the prisoners may feel toward the prison staff. Thanks to the effectiveness of these measures, there have been few incidences of prisoners attacking prison staff or sabotaging prison facilities in China.
　　对少数严重违犯监规纪律，抗拒改造的罪犯或又犯罪的罪犯，按照监管法规，要予以处罚。对个别严重违犯监规的罪犯给予禁闭下罚时，须经管理工作人员集体研究讨论并报劳改单位主管领导批准，禁闭的期限最长不得超过15天。对被禁闭的罪犯每天放风两次，每次1小时左右，其生活待遇与不参加劳动的罪犯完全相同。
In accordance with prison rules and decrees, the handful of prisoners who are serious violators of prison regulations or codes of conduct or who resist reform or commit another crime are punished. Punishment by solitary confinement in individual cases for serious violators of prison regulations must be collectively discussed by the prison staff and reported to the leaders of the reform-through-labour unit for approval. The duration of solitary confinement may not exceed 15 days. Prisoners in confinement are let out about an hour or so twice a day for fresh air, and provided exactly the same living conditions as other prisoners who do not take part in labour activities.
　　劳改机关对罪犯实行的各种奖励和处罚，受人民检察院的监督，人民检察院对劳改机关不合规定的管理活动，有权随时提出纠正。
Any reward or punishment meted out by reform-through- labour institutions is subject to the supervision of the People's Procuratorate, which has the authority to demand correction of any actions in the management of these institutions that do not conform with regulations at any time.
对罪犯的刑罚执行
 Carrying out the Punishment of Criminals
　　在中国，对罪犯执行刑罚，从收押罪犯之日起，到刑满释放为止，都严格依法办事。
The punishment of criminals in China is carried out strictly according to the law, from the day they are taken into custody to the day of their release at the end of their sentence.
　　劳改机关收押的罪犯，须是其判决已经发生法律效力的，如果发现法律文书不完备或判决尚未发生法律效力，劳改机关有权拒绝收押。收押新犯必须有医生在场，一律要进行健康检查，对有精神病或患有急性、恶性传染病的，有严重疾病需要保外就医的，怀孕或正在哺乳自己婴儿的妇女，都不予收押。收押罪犯后在3日以内通知罪犯家属，使其家属及时了解罪犯的去向。按照监管法规，大多数罪犯都被允许在他们原居住的地区就近服刑，以便于罪犯家属探视和原单位帮助教育。
Criminals are handed over to reform-through-labour institutions only after the court verdict legally goes into effect. The reform-through-labour institutions have the right to refuse to detain criminals when the related legal documents are found to be deficient or when the verdicts have not yet become legal. Doctors must be on hand when new prisoners arrive to give them physical check-ups. Those who are suffering from mental illnesses; from acute, pernicious or contagious diseases; or from any serious illness, requiring treatment outside the prison on bail plus women who are pregnant or breast-feeding their babies are not taken into prison. Within three days after a criminal is incarcerated, members of his or her family must be notified so that they promptly learn of his or her whereabouts. In compliance with legal provisions concerning prison management, most criminals are allowed to serve their sentences in the area around their original residence, making it convenient for their family members to visit them and for their former work units to assist in educating them.
　　依照中国的法律，劳改机关在罪犯的整个服刑过程中，不但及时向有关部门转递其申诉，而且主动地对罪犯的申诉进行分析研究，对判决有可能为错误的，主动转请人民检察院或者原判人民法院处理。
According to Chinese law, the reform-through-labour institutions must not only immediately pass on a prisoner's appeal to the department concerned at any time during the term of imprisonment, but also conduct their own analysis and study of the appeal. When the institution disagrees with a judgment, the institution itself may request the People's Procuratorate or the People's Court which made the original judgment to reexamine the case.
　　为了有效地调动罪犯的改造积极性，中国法律规定了减刑和假释制度，即罪犯在服刑改造期间，凡经过考核，接受改造、确有悔改或有立功表现，均可依法获得减刑或假释。八十年代初以来，中国劳改机关对罪犯的考核、奖惩普遍实行了计分的办法，即对罪犯的日常改造表现用分数来反映，根据规定的基础分，对积极改造的给予奖分，对有违规违纪行为的给予扣分，并按月公布每名罪犯的奖、扣分情况，罪犯有权对所得分数提出质疑和申辩。劳改机关定期或不定期按照罪犯的综合改造表现，择优依法提请人民法院予以减刑或假释。罪犯本人根据考核办法和公布的得分情况，也可以知道自己获得减刑或假释的机会。为了保证奖罚的公正、合理，还对罪犯的减刑和假释程序作了严格规定。这种考核、奖罚办法大大调动了罪犯接受改造的主动性。据统计，1990年全国在押罪犯中获得减刑、假释的罪犯占在押犯总数的16.83%，1991年为18.35%。
In order to foster the desire to reform among prisoners, Chinese law contains provisions stipulating a system for reducing sentences and release on parole. All prisoners who qualify, accept reform, and show true repentance or outstanding behaviour during their prison terms may be granted a reduction in their sentence or release on parole in accordance with the law. Since the early 1980s', a system of points has been generally adopted by all Chinese reform-through-labour institutions for assessment and determination of reward and punishment, wherein day-to-day behaviour of the prisoners as they undergo reform is translated into points. On the basis of a fixed number of points, those who show a positive attitude towards reform will be awarded additional points and those who show indiscipline or break regulations will have points deducted, with results of additions and deductions of points made public every month. Prisoners have the right to question or protest their scores. In accordance with the law, the reform-through-labour institutions regularly or from time to time recommend to the People's Court that selected prisoners have their sentences reduced or be released on parole, based on their overall conduct while undergoing reform. From the results of assessment and the published scores, the prisoners themselves are aware of the chances for having their sentence reduced or being released on parole. To ensure fair and rational rewards and penalties, strict regulations govern the procedures for reduction of sentence or release on parole. This method of assessment and reward and penalty greatly increases prisoners' desire to reform. According to statistics, in 1990 16.38% of all the imprisoned criminals in the whole country had their sentences commuted or were released on parole, and in 1991 the figure was 18.35%.
　　为了改造那些犯有死罪但还有可能改造的罪犯，中国独创了判处死刑缓期二年执行的制度。《中华人民共和国刑法》第四十三条规定：“死刑只适用于罪大恶极的犯罪分子。对于应当判处死刑的犯罪分子，如果不是必须立即执行的，可以判处死刑同时宣告缓期二年执行，实行劳动改造，以观后效。”依照刑法规定，对于被判处死刑缓期二年执行的罪犯，“在死刑缓期执行期间，如果确有悔改，二年期满以后，减为无期徒刑；如果确有悔改并有立功表现，二年期满以后，减为15年以上20年以下有期徒刑。”从司法实践看，被判处死刑缓期二年执行的罪犯，经过改造后，99%以上都被减为无期徒刑或有期徒刑。对减为无期徒刑的罪犯，在执行期间，如确有悔改或立功表现，还可以减为有期徒刑。
In order to reform those criminals who have committed crimes punishable by death but who may still be reformable, China has created a unique system of a death penalty with a two-year reprieve. Article 43 of the Criminal Law of the People's Republic of China stipulates that, "the death penalty is only applicable to criminals who have committed the most heinous of crimes. Criminals who should receive the death penalty but need not be executed immediately can be sentenced to death with a two-year reprieve, during which time they are to undergo reform through labour to see if it will be effective." In keeping with provisions of the criminal law, if a criminal sentenced to death with a two-year reprieve shows genuine regret for his or her crimes during the probationary period, the sentence can be commuted to life imprisonment upon completion of the two-year reprieve. Those who have shown true repentance and exemplary behaviour can have their sentences reduced to a set term of imprisonment between 15-20 years. In actual judicial practice, over 99% of criminals given the death penalty with two years reprieve have had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment or set terms of imprisonment through reform. Those who have had their sentences reduced to life imprisonment can have their sentences further commuted to a set term of imprisonment if they show repentance and exemplary behaviour during prison service.
　　对在监狱、劳改场所内重新犯罪，触犯刑律的，要依法提请人民法院对新罪应处的刑罚和旧罪未执行完毕的刑罚予以数罪并罚。由于绝大多数罪犯接受改造，只有极少数人因重新犯罪而被加刑。据统计，1990年全国在押罪犯中因在狱内重新犯罪而被加刑的只占在押犯总数的0.387%，1991年为0.319%。
For criminals who have committed new crimes in the prison or reform-through-labour institution, violating criminal law, the People's Court, in accordance with the law, is petitioned to pass sentence for the new crimes, to be added to the remaining term of imprisonment for the old crimes. As the overwhelming majority of criminals want to reform, only a handful of prisoners have been given additional penalties due to new crimes. According to statistics, only 0.387% of the total number of criminals in custody in the country were given increased sentences because of new crimes committed in prison in 1990 and only 0.319% in 1991.
　　对于怀孕或正在哺乳自己婴儿的犯罪妇女及有严重疾病的罪犯，人民法院可判处监外执行。即使是执行中的有期徒刑、无期徒刑的罪犯，患有严重疾病的，也可以保外就医。对未成年犯、老年犯和女犯的保外就医条件适当放宽。据统计，1990年，全国保外就医的罪犯占在押犯总数的1.91%，1991年为1.94%。
For a female criminal who is pregnant or breast-feeding her baby, or a criminal who is seriously ill, the People's Court may sentence the prisoner to serve his or her term outside of prison. Release on parole for medical treatment is also granted to all seriously ill prisoners, who are serving either a set term or life imprisonment. Requirements for being released on parole for medical treatment are more flexible for juvenile, elderly and female prisoners. Statistics show that 1.91% of the prisoners in the country were released on parole for medical treatment in 1990 and 1.94% in 1991.
　　劳改机关在罪犯刑满前就做好相应的准备，刑满之日必须依法予以释放，并发给途中足够的路费、伙食费。对有病的，提前通知家属来接或由监狱、劳改场所派人护送。
A reform-through-labour institution needs to do a certain amount of preparatory work before a prisoner is to be released, since a prisoner must be released in accordance with the law on the day the term of imprisonment ends. At the time of release, a prisoner is given enough money to cover travel and food expenses. If a prisoner to be released is not well, family members are informed ahead of time to come and take him home, or the reform-through-labour institution assigns people from its staff to accompany him to his home.
　　为了有利于罪犯的改造，中国同世界上多数国家一样，对那些犯罪情节轻微，认罪态度较好，且不致再危害社会的犯罪分子实行缓刑。近年来，中国司法机关依法适当扩大缓刑适用范围。1991年，被判处缓刑的罪犯为6.5万余名。司法实践表明，对这些罪犯实行缓刑，使他们不与家人分离，不失去原有的工作，不脱离正常的社会环境，有利于激发他们接受改造的积极性，有利于社会对他们的教育、感化与改造。
To help reform criminals, China, like most other countries in the world, suspends sentence for criminals who have committed a minor crime, have pleaded guilty and are not likely to further endanger society. In the past few years, the departments of justice have appropriately expanded the scope for sentence suspension according to law. In 1991, over 65,000 criminals had their sentence suspended. Judicial experience shows that giving criminals suspended sentences allows them to stay with their families, keep their jobs and remain in a normal social environment. This helps stimulate their enthusiasm for receiving reform and contributes to their reform through education and persuasion by society at large.
对刑满释放人员的就业安置与教育保护
  Employment, Resettlement, Education and Protection for Convicts Who Have Served Their Term and Been Released  
　　中国政府十分重视保护刑满释放人员回归社会的公民权利。中国政府规定，对刑满释放人员不歧视、不嫌弃，做好社会就业安置工作，给他们参加学习、工作、劳动的机会，促使他们走上正路。
The Chinese Government attaches great importance to the protection of the civil rights of former convicts when they return to society after serving a sentence. The government has ruled that former prisoners are not to be discriminated against or shut out of society, and that they are to be offered jobs to provide them with opportunities to study and work and encourage them to go straight. 
　　中国从长期的实际经验中深知：罪犯刑满释放后个人权利的恢复与保障是重要的，但如果不创造必要条件，帮助刑满释放人员安家立业，避免重蹈复辙，那么，这种个人权利的恢复与保障仍是消极的，不具有真正的积极的社会意义。
From long experience China is well aware of the fact that when a convict serves his or her sentence and is released, restoring and guaranteeing individual rights is important. However, the necessary conditions must be created; released prisoners must be given assistance in settling down and finding employment so they can avoid making the same mistakes all over again. Otherwise, restoring and guaranteeing a released prisoner's individual rights would be an empty gesture and would not have any really positive effect on society.
　　中国政府十分注意加强对罪犯刑满释放前的教育。服刑将满的罪犯提前被送往出监队进行管理教育。出监队全面检查其服刑期间的改造状况，并根据检查情况，进行针对性的补课教育，以巩固改造成果。还请当地党政机关、工商、税务、劳动就业等部门的负责人和工作人员向他们系统介绍当前的社会形势、法律政策、就业趋势等，教育他们出监后怎样遵纪守法、妥善处理可能遇到的实际困难，正确对待生活、家庭、婚姻和就业等问题。
The Chinese Government pays a great deal of attention to making sure prisoners receive pre-release education. A criminal who has served nearly all of his sentence is sent to the release team who then take charge of the prisoner and the pre-release education. The release team makes an overall review of the prisoner's performance during reform in prison and, based on the results, provides supplementary education as needed to consolidate the positive results of the reform. Leading members and staff of local Party and government offices, taxation authorities, and industrial and commercial as well as labour and employment departments are invited to speak to the prisoners. They systematically explain recent social developments, current laws and policies, employment trends, etc. and teach them how to obey the law and behave properly, the best ways to handle practical problems they are likely to have, and how to deal with situations in daily life, family life, marriage and employment. 
　　刑满释放人员原则上送回原籍、捕前所在地或直系亲属所在地，由社会采取多渠道、多层次、多种形式的办法安置，个别确实无家可归而又自愿留下就业的，由原劳改单位收留安置。
Prisoners who serve their sentences and are released are principally returned to where they used to live before they were imprisoned or where their immediate family lives. Society helps them settle down through various channels on many levels and in a number of forms. Those few who have no home to return to and are willing to stay on and accept employment are allowed to live in their former reform-through-labour institution. 
　　1983年5月，国务院有关部门发出了《关于犯人刑满释放后落户和安置的联合通知》，使刑满释放人员的落户和安置工作有章可循，其主要内容有：
The Joint Notification on Settling of Convicts Released from Imprisonment of May 1983, issued by the relevant departments of the State Council, provides a legal basis for the resettlement of released convicts. Following are the major points. 
　　服刑期间保留职工身份的，刑满释放后由原单位予以安置。
For a prisoner who has retained employee status during the term of imprisonment, resettlement is the responsibility of the former work unit. 
　　已被原单位开除或除名，但改造表现好的，劳改单位在其刑满释放前，向原单位提出重新安排工作的建议。
For a prisoner who was dismissed or had his or her name removed from the payroll of the original work unit, but did well in reform-through-labour, before the prisoner's release the reform-through-labour institution is to recommend him or her to be rehired at the former work unit. 
　　捕前无职业或者不符合回原单位安置条件的刑满释放人员，回城镇后和一般待业人员同样对待，由劳动部门或街道，按照现行就业政策积极予以安置。
Someone who was jobless when arrested or is no longer suitable in some way to return to his or her former work unit is to be treated the same way as an ordinary person waiting for employment. In accordance with current employment policies, the labour department or neighbourhood committees in the city or town where the prisoner is released is to take positive steps to resettle the reformed criminal. 
　　原系在校青少年学生，刑满释放后，符合学龄规定，现实表现好并经考试合格，允许他们复学、升学。
Someone who was in school when arrested is to be allowed to return to that school or go to a higher level school. 
　　根据几个大城市的抽样调查，北京市刑满释放人员的安置率从1983年至1990年平均为83.4%，1988年达90.2%；上海市1982年至1986年平均安置率为79%，其中安置在国营企业和集体企业的占42.6%，从事个体经营的占26.9%，其他占9.5%。天津市近几年平均安置率为85%。
According to a random survey taken in several large cities, the settlement rate of released prisoners in Beijing from 1983 to 1990 averaged 83.4%, peaking at 90.2% in 1988. The average settlement rate in Shanghai was 79% from 1982 to 1986, 42.6% finding jobs in state or collective enterprises, 26.9% becoming self-employed and 9.5% finding other types of employment. In Tianjin, the average settlement rate in recent years was 85%. 
　　为了巩固刑满释放人员的改造成果，预防重新犯罪，当地政府组织有关部门，发动社会力量和家属亲友的力量，加强对他们的帮助、教育和保护。有工作单位的，由厂矿企业组织工会、青年团或车间，成立帮教小组具体落实；没有工作单位的，由街道和有关部门负责；农村的由乡、村负责，落实专人进行帮教。对表现好的及时表扬，鼓励上进；对有缺点错误的，诚恳帮助，以理服人；对有重新违法犯罪迹象的进行反复教育，指明危害，晓之以理。
In order to solidify the successful reform of released prisoners and prevent them from returning to crime, local governments coordinate the efforts of the relevant departments, society at large and the prisoner's own relatives and friends in supplementing the assistance, education and protection provided for them. For those who have a work unit, the factory or enterprise contacts the trade union, the youth league or workshop to set up an assistance group to help them. Those who have no work unit are the responsibility of neighbourhood committees and relevant departments. Township or village authorities are responsible for those who settle in rural areas, designating specific people to help them. Those who conduct themselves well are promtly commended and encouraged to make more progress; those who have made mistakes are given sincere help and advice. Those who seem to be returning to crime are continually advised of the bad consequences of such actions in an attempt to re-educate them with reason. 
　　1991年3月2日，中国全国人大常委会通过了《关于加强社会治安综合治理的决定》，明确规定，要加强对违法犯罪人员的教育、挽救、改造工作，妥善安置刑满释放人员，减少重新违法犯罪。
On March 2nd, 1991, the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress passed the Decision on Strengthening the Multifaceted Approach to Public Security. It clearly stipulates that efforts to educate, rescue and reform law-breakers and criminals are to be strengthened, and that released convicts are to be appropriately settled to reduce the chance of their breaking the law again.
　　1990年6月，中国成立了关心下一代工作委员会，其任务之一就是指导对失足青年的帮教与保护。不少地区也相继成立了以老干部、老教师、老工人为主体的关心下一代工作委员会，目前全国共有近百万老干部投身这一活动。
In June, 1990, the first Working Committee for the Care of the Next Generation was set up in China, with assistance, education and protection of juvenile deliquents as one of its tasks. Such committees, composed mainly of senior cadres, teachers and workers, have one by one been established in many regions, with about one million senior cadres across the country now involved in this work. 
　　由于推行这些法律政策措施，中国刑满释放人员重新犯罪率是比较低的。不少地区和单位出现了连续几年、十几年没有发生重新犯罪的好典型。例如：广州市越秀区红书房建队从1979年创办以来，先后吸收失足青年和刑满释放人员178人，其中有15人当了商店经理、施工队长、工会主席等领导职务，有118人受到省、市、区、街道表彰，十几年没有一人重新犯罪。
As a result of the implementation of these laws, policies and measures, the rate of recidivism among prisoners released in China is fairly low. Many areas and work units have experienced no recidivism at all for as long as ten or more years. Take for example, the Hongshu Housing Construction Team in the Yuexiu District of Guangzhou, founded in 1979. It has employed 178 juvenile deliquents and released prisoners since its founding, including 15 who became store managers, leaders of construction teams or chairmen of a trade union and 118 who have been commended by provincial, municipal, district or neighbourhood authorities. For over ten years they have not had a single case of a juvenile deliquent or reformed prisoner going back to crime.
西藏的主权归属与人权状况
Tibet -- Its Ownership And Human Rights Situation 
中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China
一九九二年九月·北京
September 1992, Beijing
目　录
Contents
前言
Preface
 西藏的主权归属
Ownership of Tibet
 所谓“西藏独立”的由来   
 Origins of So-called 'Tibetan Independence'
达赖集团的分裂活动和中央政府的政策
 The Dalai Clique's Separatist Activities and The Central Government's Policy
旧西藏的封建农奴制
 Feudal Serfdom in Old Tibet
人民获得了人身自由    
 The People Gain Personal Freedom
人民享有的政治权利   
 The People Enjoy Political Rights
经济的发展和人民生活的改善  
 Economic Development and Improvement of Living Standards
宗教信仰自由   
 Freedom of Religious Belief
教育和文化的发展   
 Development of Education and Culture
人民健康和人口发展状况  
 People's Health and Demographic Growth
生存环境的保护
 Protection of Living Environment
国家对西藏发展的特殊支持
Special State Aid for Tibet's Development
 
前　言　　
Preface
    西藏曾经被认为是一个神秘的地区，现在她早已揭去神秘的面纱，呈现在世界面前。她正经历着从极端落后的中世纪状况逐步走向现代化的天翻地覆的变化。
Once regarded as a mysterious region, Tibet has long thrown off its veil to reveal itself to the world. She is now experiencing earth-shaking changes in a shift from Medieval extreme backwardness to modernization.
　　但是世人对这一地区的实际情况仍然知之甚少。于是一些曾经侵略或试图侵略她的人高喊，她受到了侵略；一些曾经完全剥夺了这一地区人民人身自由的人呼叫，那里人民的人权受到了侵犯。谣言、歪曲、猜疑、误解……织成一层烟雾又笼罩着这个地区。
However, the world still knows very little about real developments in this region. So those who once committed or attempted aggression against her yell at the top of their voices that Tibet is being invaded; others who once deprived the people of this region of all personal freedom shout that the human rights of the people there are being infringed. Rumors, distortion, suspicion, misunderstanding...all combine to form a layer of mist to envelop this region.
　　要了解这个地区的真实情况，还是要看事实。
In order to know the situation there, it is imperative to look at the facts.
　　因此，最好的办法就是把事实摆出来。
Therefore, the best course of action is to present them.
西藏的主权归属
Ownership of Tibet
　　西藏在中国的西南部。居住在这里的藏族先民，远在公元前就与生活在中原的汉族有联系。以后，经过漫长的岁月，西藏高原上分散的众多部落逐渐统一起来，成为现在的藏族。到唐朝（公元618—907年），藏汉双方通过王室间的联姻、会盟，在政治上形成了团结友好的亲谊关系，在经济和文化上建立了密切的联系，为最终建立统一的国家奠定了深厚的基础。在西藏自治区首府拉萨的布达拉宫，至今一直供奉着公元641年唐朝嫁给藏族吐蕃王的文成公主的塑像。大昭寺前的广场上还矗立着公元823年为双方会盟建立的“唐蕃会盟碑”。碑文记载，“舅甥二主，商议社稷如一，结立大和盟约，永无渝替!神人俱以证知，世世代代，使其称赞。”
Tibet is located in southwest China. The ancestors of the Tibetan race who lived there struck up links with the Han in the Central Plains long before the Christian era. Later, over a long period of years, the numerous tribes scattered on the Tibet Plateau became unified to form the present Tibetan race. By the Tang Dynasty (618-907), the Tibetans and Hans had, through marriage between royal families and meetings leading to alliances, cemented political and kinship ties of unity and political friendship and formed close economic and cultural relations, laying a solid foundation for the ultimate founding of a unified nation. In Lhasa, the capital of the Tibet Autonomous Region, the statue of the Tang Princess Wen Cheng, who married the Tubo tsampo, king of Tibet, in 641, is still enshrined and worshiped in the Potala Palace. The Tang-Tubo Alliance Monument marking the meeting for this purpose between Tang and Tubo erected in 823 still stands in the square in front of the Jokhang Monastery. The monument inscription reads in part, "The two sovereigns, uncle and nephew, having come to agreement that their territories be united as one, have signed this alliance of great peace to last for eternity! May God and humanity bear witness thereto so that it may be praised from generation to generation."
　　十三世纪中叶，西藏正式归入中国元朝版图。自此之后，尽管中国经历了几代王朝的兴替，多次更换过中央政权，但西藏一直处于中央政权的管辖之下。
In the mid-13th century, Tibet was officially incorporated into the territory of China's Yuan Dynasty. Since then, although China experienced several dynastic changes, Tibet has remained under the jurisdiction of the central government of China.
　　元朝（公元1271—1368年）
Yuan Dynasty (1271-1368)
　　十三世纪初，蒙古族领袖成吉思汗在中国北部建立蒙古汗国。1247年，西藏宗教界领袖萨迦班智达·贡嘎坚赞同蒙古皇子阔端在凉州（今中国甘肃武威）议定了西藏归顺的条件，其中包括呈献图册，交纳贡物，接受派官设治。1629年成书的《萨迦世系史》记载着当时萨迦班智达写给西藏各地僧俗首领的信中关于必须归顺和接受所规定的地方行政制度的内容。1271年，蒙古汗政权定国号为元，并于1279年统一了全中国，创建了继汉（公元前206—公元220年）、唐王朝之后中国版图内各地区、各民族大统一的中央政权，西藏成为中国元朝中央政府直接治理下的一个行政区域。
In the early 13th century, Genghis Khan, leader of the Mongols, established the Mongol Khanate in north China. In 1247 Sagya Pandit Gonggar Gyamcan, religious leader of Tibet, met the Mongol Prince Gotan at Liangzhou (present-day Wuwei of Gansu, China) and decided on terms for Tibetan submission to the Mongols, including presentation of map and census books, payment of tributes, and the acceptance of rule by appointed officials. The Tibetan work Sagya Genealogy written in 1629 includes Sagya Pandit's letter to the religious and secular leaders in the various parts of Tibet that they must pledge allegiance to the Mongols and accept the regional administrative system prescribed for Tibet. The regime of the Mongol Khanate changed its title to Yuan in 1271 and unified the whole of China in 1279, establishing a central government, which, following the Han (206 BC-220) and Tang dynasties, achieved great unification of various regions and races within the domain of China. Tibet became an administrative region directly under the administration of the central government of China's Yuan Dynasty.
　　元朝皇帝设置了宣政院，直接管理西藏地区军政要务。这一机构的人员选用，由皇帝决定，它的报告直接送给皇帝。掌握宣政院实权的是“院使”，一般由中央政府总理全国政务的右丞相兼领。
The Yuan emperor established the Xuanzheng Yuan or Ministry for the Spread of Governance to directly handle important military and political affairs of the Tibet region. Choice of its members lay with the emperor and its reports were submitted directly to the monarch. Yuanshi, the chief minister having real authority in the Xuanzheng Yuan, was a post generally held concurrently by the right-hand prime minister of the central government who was in charge of the whole nation's governmental affairs.
　　在西藏地区成立了地方军政机构，名为“宣慰使司都元帅府”，隶属于宣政院。宣慰使司下面还辖有管理民政的十三个万户府、千户所等。所有机构和官职的名称都是元朝中央规定的。元朝在西藏驻有军队，并由一位王子及其后裔率军驻守西藏地区的东部边缘，逢西藏有事，即可就近入藏，以尽镇戍边疆的职责。1290年，一名万户长叛乱，元朝中央派遣这位王子率军入藏平息。
In the Tibetan region, local military and administrative organs were set up under the name of the High Pacification Commissioner's Office, which was under the Xuanzheng Yuan. Under the jurisdiction of this office were 13 wanhu offices (myriarchies each in command of 10,000 households) and more qianhu offices (chiliarchies each in command of 1,000 households) handling civil administration. The names of these organizations and official posts were decided by the central government of the Yuan Dynasty. It also had troops stationed in Tibet. A royal prince and his descendents were stationed on the eastern border of Tibet at the head of an army. When Tibet was enmeshed in trouble, the prince could enter the area from nearby garrison to perform his duty of guarding the security of the border region. In 1290, when the head of a wanhu office rose in rebellion, the central government of the Yuan Dynasty dispatched the prince into Tibet at the head of his army to put it down.
　　元朝中央派官员入藏，按照户口多寡，地形险易，出产丰啬，设立大小驿站，联成交通线，由西藏通往大都（今北京市）。
The central government of the Yuan Dynasty sent officials into Tibet to set up post stations, whose size varied according to the local population, topography and resources. These post stations were linked up in a communication line extending from Tibet up to Dadu (present-day Beijing).
　　元朝中央还派官员在西藏进行人口调查，确定各万户属下可支应差役的人口数，决定沿驿路各地必须供给的力役、物资、运畜。1268年、1287年、1334年进行了三次人口调查。藏文史书《汉藏史集》中有关于这三次调查的详细记载。
The central government of the Yuan Dynasty also dispatched officials into Tibet to conduct censuses, establish the number of corvee laborers in areas under various wanhu offices and decide the number of corvee laborers, provisions and animal transport the areas along the post route had to supply. Such censuses were conducted three times in Tibet, in 1268, 1287 and 1334. The Tibetan work History From the Han and Tibetan Sources records them in detail.
　　明朝（公元1368—1644年）
Ming Dynasty (1368-1644)
　　1368年明王朝接替元王朝，继承了治理西藏的权力。
In 1368 the Ming Dynasty replaced the Yuan Dynasty in China, and inherited the right to rule Tibet.
　　明朝中央对元代的官职名称、品秩，大都保留原状。在今西藏中部和东部分别设立“乌思藏行都指挥使司”与“朵甘行都指挥使司”，隶属于陕西行都指挥使司，相当于行省级军区机构，兼理民政。西藏西部阿里另设置“俄力思军民元帅府”。这些机构的负责官员均由中央任命。
The central government of the Ming Dynasty retained most of the titles and ranks of official positions instituted during the Yuan Dynasty. In the central and eastern parts of present-day Tibet, the Dbus-Gtsang Itinerant High Commandery and the Mdo-khams Itinerant High Commandery were set up respectively. Equivalent to provincial-level military organs, they operated under the Shaanxi Itinerant High Commandery and, at the same time, handled civil administration. In Ngari in west Tibet, the E-Li-Si Army-Civilian Marshal Office was instituted. Leading officials of these organs were all appointed by the central government.
　　明朝第三个皇帝明成祖（1403—1424年在位），以西藏佛教和政治合为一体，大小派别各踞一方，为有利于治理，给西藏各地宗教领袖封以“法王”、“王”、“灌顶国师”等名号。王位的继承必须经皇帝批准，遣使册封，新王才能即位。按照朝廷的规定，每年元旦，王须遣使或亲自来京参加朝贺典礼，呈递贺表贡物。对于入贡期限、来京人数、所取路途、沿途各地供应，都有具体规定。至今西藏有的喇嘛寺内还保存着当年必须朝拜的皇帝万岁牌。
The third emperor of the Ming Dynasty, Chengzu (reigned 1403-1424) saw the advantage of combined Buddhist religious and political power in Tibet and rivalry between sects occupying different areas. So he conferred honorific titles on religious leaders in various parts of Tibet such as the "prince of Dharma," "prince" and "national master in Tantrism." Succession to such princeship needed the approval of the emperor, who would send an envoy to confer the official title on each new prince. Only then could the new prince assume his role. According to the stipulations of the Ming court, the prince had to dispatch his envoy or come in person to the capital to participate in the New Year's Day celebration each year and present his memorial of congratulation and tribute. The Ming court had detailed stipulations that limited the dates for presenting tributes, the number of personnel allowed in the capital, the route to be taken, and also provisions to be supplied by local authorities along the route. The tablets wishing longevity to the emperors before which the prayers had to prostrate themselves are still kept in some of the monasteries in Tibet.
　　达赖喇嘛和班禅喇嘛两大活佛系统属于藏传佛教格鲁派。格鲁派在明代兴起，三世达赖喇嘛本是格鲁派的一个寺院的住持。明朝中央特别开例，准予他入贡，1587年封赐他以“朵儿只唱”名号。
The Dalai Lama and the Bainqen Lama are the two leading incarnation hierarchies of the Gelug Sect of Tibetan Buddhism. The Gelug Sect rose during the Ming Dynasty, and the 3rd Dalai Lama was the abbot of one of the sect's monasteries. The central government of the Ming Dynasty showed him special favor by allowing him to pay tribute. In 1587 he was granted the title of Dorjichang or Vajradhara Dalai Lama.
　　西藏地方官员犯法，亦由中央惩处。
Any official of the Tibetan local government who offended the law was punished by the central government.
　　清朝（公元1644—1911年）
Qing Dynasty (1644-1911)
　　1644年，清王朝取代了明王朝，进一步加强了对西藏的治理。清朝皇帝于1653年、1713年分别册封五世达赖喇嘛和五世班禅喇嘛，自此正式确定了达赖喇嘛和班禅额尔德尼的封号，以及他们在西藏的政治和宗教地位。达赖喇嘛在拉萨统治西藏的大部分地区，班禅额尔德尼在日喀则统治西藏的另一部分地区。1719年，清政府派军队进入西藏，驱逐盘踞拉萨三年之久的准噶尔部，着手改订西藏的行政体制。清朝皇帝封西康地区的一个青年活佛为七世达赖喇嘛，护送入藏；任命四名有功有名望的藏官为“噶伦”，管理西藏政务。1727年，设驻藏大臣，代表中央监督西藏地方行政，西藏与四川、云南、青海的界线，也于此时派员正式勘定。
When the Qing Dynasty replaced the Ming Dynasty in 1644, it further strengthened administration over Tibet. In 1653 and 1713, the Qing emperors granted honorific titles to the 5th Dalai Lama and the 5th Bainqen Lama, henceforth officially establishing the titles of the Dalai Lama and the Bainqen Erdeni and their political and religious status in Tibet. The Dalai Lama ruled the bulk of areas from Lhasa while the Bainqen Erdeni ruled the remaining area of Tibet from Xigaze. In 1719, Qing government troops were sent into Tibet to dispel the Zungar forces which had been entrenched in Lhasa for three years, and set out to reform Tibet's administrative system. The Qing emperor made a young Living Buddha of the Xikang area the 7th Dalai Lama and had him escorted into Tibet, and appointed four Tibetan officials renowned for meritorious service "Galoins" to handle Tibet's political affairs. From 1727, High commissioners were stationed in Tibet to supervise local administration on behalf of the central authorities. Officials were also assigned about this time to survey and delimit the borders between Tibet (i.e. Xizang) and Sichuan, Yunnan and Qinghai.
　　为了完善西藏行政机构的职能，清朝多次颁下“章程”，整顿改革旧的制度，建立新的制度。1793年，颁布了《钦定藏内善后章程》，共二十九条。章程的主要内容有：
In order to perfect Tibet's administrative organizations, the Qing Dynasty on many occasions enacted "regulations" to rectify and reform old systems and establish new ones. The Authorized Regulations for the Better Governing of Tibet, promulgated in 1793, had 29 articles. Their major purport was:
　　清政府掌握确定西藏各大活佛包括达赖喇嘛、班禅额尔德尼去世后转世灵童的大权。每逢一代达赖喇嘛、班禅额尔德尼和西藏各大转世活佛的转世灵童觅到时，即将灵童姓名缮写在签上，纳入中央颁发的金瓶，由驻藏大臣会集有关大活佛，掣签确定（金瓶和签现在仍保存在拉萨）。转世灵童的剃发、取法名、选定授戒的师傅和授经的师傅，也都须经过驻藏大臣奏报朝廷核准。当举行达赖喇嘛、班禅额尔德尼的坐床和亲政典礼时，中央派大员亲临监视。
The Qing government holds the power to confirm the reincarnation of all deceased high Living Buddhas of Tibet including the Dalai Lama and the Bainqen Erdeni. When the reincarnate boy has been found, his name will be written on a lot, which shall be put into a gold urn bestowed by the central government. The high commissioners will bring together appropriate high-ranking Living Buddhas to determine the authenticity of the reincarnate boy by drawing lots from the gold urn. (Both the gold urn and lots are still preserved in Lhasa.) The tonsure of the incarnate Living Buddha, his religious name, the choice of the master to initiate him into monkhood and his sutra instructor all have to be reported by the high commissioners to the imperial court for examination and approval. The central government will send high officials to supervise in person the installation ceremony for the new Dalai Lama and the new Bainqen Erdeni and also the ceremony for their taking over reins of government at coming of age.
　　驻藏大臣代表中央政府督办藏内事务，地位与达赖喇嘛、班禅额尔德尼平等。噶伦以下（包括噶伦）都是属员。
The high commissioners will supervise the handling of Tibetan affairs on behalf of the central government, enjoying the equal standing with the Dalai Lama and the Bainqen Erdeni. All the Galoins and those below them are subordinates.
　　对西藏文武官员确定品级、名额和升补手续。最高一级藏族官员有噶伦四名、代本六名，由中央任命。噶伦、代本的年俸由中央发给。
The ranks and numbers of Tibetan civil and military officials, and procedures for their promotion and replacement are stipulated. The highest-Ranking Tibetan officials including four Galoins and six Deboins are to be appointed by the central government. The annual salaries of the Galoins and Deboins will be paid by the central government.
　　在西藏成立正规藏军，名额3000人，规定了军官等级、人数，军饷补给来源，武器配备，驻防地点。另外，从内地调驻西藏各地官兵1400多名。藏汉军队统由中央派驻的官员管辖。
A regular army of 3,000 will be organized in Tibet. The regulations stipulate ranks and numbers of military officials, the source of troop pay and provisions, plus weaponry and places where troops are to be stationed. In addition, some 1,400 troops will be transferred from the interior to stations in various localities of Tibet. Both Tibetan and Han troops are put under the command of officers sent by the central government.
　　决定在西藏照内地之例，设立铸钱局，铸造官钱行使，银币正面背面分别用汉藏文字铸“乾隆宝藏”字样。
A mint will be set up in Tibet along the lines established by those in the interior to make official money for circulation. On the two sides of the silver coinage the words "Qianlong Treasure" will be cast in the Han Chinese and Tibetan.
　　达赖喇嘛、班禅额尔德尼每年的财务收支，由驻藏大臣稽查总核。
The annual financial receipts and expenditures of the Dalai Lama and the Bainqen Erdeni will be subject to checking by the high commissioners.
　　西藏差役由全社会平均负担。贵族和大寺庙中实有劳绩可受优待免除差役者，须经过驻藏大臣及达赖喇嘛核准发给执照。
Tibet's taxation and corvee labor will be born by the whole society on an equal footing. Only those nobles and large monasteries who have made real contributions will enjoy preferential treatment and exemptions, but these must be examined and approved by the high commissioners and the Dalai Lama, who will issue them licences for this purpose.
　　对来西藏贸易的尼泊尔、克什米尔商人要进行登记，造具名册，呈报驻藏大臣备案，由负责官员签发路证。凡外人要求到拉萨者，须听候驻藏大臣衙门审批。藏人出境至尼泊尔等地，由驻藏大臣签发路证，规定往返日期。
Merchants from Nepal and Kashmir wanting to do business in Tibet must register. The registration book must be filed with the high commissioners for record. The appropriate officials will issue laissez-passers to them. Any foreigner applying to enter Lhasa must be examined for approval by the High Commissioner's Office. The high commissioners will issue laissez-passers to Tibetans who apply to go to Nepal or other places, and set the leaving and returning dates for them.
　　西藏西南部与印度、尼泊尔等国的边界上若干地点，设立国界标志，驻藏大臣每年出巡各地，检查驻军防务及界碑情况。
National boundary markers will be erected in a number of places where southwest Tibet borders on countries like India and Nepal. The high commissioners will make an annual tour in Tibet to inspect the defense arrangements of the troops stationed there and matters concerning border markers.
　　一切西藏涉外事宜均由驻藏大臣全权处理。噶伦不得与外方通信，达赖喇嘛、班禅额尔德尼接到外方信件、布施，俱报告驻藏大臣查验，并代为酌定回信。
All foreign affairs involving Tibet will be left completely in the hands of the high commissioners. No Galoin is allowed to maintain correspondence with the outside, and all letters and alms received by the Dalai Lama and the Bainqen Erdeni from the outside must be submitted to the high commissioners for censorship and decision concerning a reply.
　　对犯罪者的处罚，都要经过驻藏大臣审批。
Criminal punishment will be reported to the high commissioners for examination and approval.
　　从1727年始设驻藏大臣到清王朝覆灭的1911年，清中央政府先后派遣驻藏大臣达百余人。
Between 1727, when the high commissionership was first established, and 1911, the year the Qing Dynasty was overthrown, the central government of the Qing Dynasty stationed more than 100 high commissioners in Tibet.
　　中华民国（公元1912—1949年）
Republic of China (1912-49)
　　1911年秋，中国内地爆发了辛亥革命，推翻了统治中国近270年的清王朝，建立了中华民国。
In the autumn of 1911, revolution took place in China's interior, overthrowing the 270-year-old rule of the Qing Dynasty and establishing the Republic of China.
　　中华民国一经成立，即宣布它是合汉、满、蒙、回、藏等民族为一体的共和国。1912年1月1日，中华民国第一任临时大总统孙中山在就职宣言书中向全世界昭告：“国家之本，在于人民，合汉、满、蒙、回、藏等诸地为一国，则合汉、满、蒙、回、藏诸族为一人，是曰民族之统一。”当时作为国旗的五色旗即象征五族为一体。3月，中华民国南京临时参议院颁布的民国第一部宪法《中华民国临时约法》明确规定，西藏是中华民国领土的一部分。
Upon its founding, the Republic of China declared itself a unified republic of the Han, Manchu, Mongol, Hui, Tibetan and other races. In his inauguration statement on January 1, 1912, Sun Yat-sen, the provisional first president of the Republic of China, declared to the whole world: "The foundation of the country lies in the people, and the unification of lands inhabited by the Han, Manchu, Mongol, Hui and Tibetan people into one country means the unification of the Han, Manchu, Mongol, Hui and Tibetan races. It is called national unification." The five-color flag used as the national flag at that time represented the unification of the five main races. In March the Nanjing-based provisional senate of the Republic of China promulgated the republic's first constitution, the Provisional Constitution of the Republic of China, in which it was clearly stipulated that Tibet was a part of the territory of the Republic of China.
　　1912年8月10日，为组建中华民国第一届正式国会，北京政府颁布《中华中国国会组织法》和国会议员选举法，规定西藏地方民众参加选举的办法和被选举的议员直接参政。1927年，中国国民党在南京组建国民政府，并于1931年召开国民会议，十三世达赖喇嘛和九世班禅额尔德尼均派出正式代表参加。这次国民会议制订的《中华民国训政时期约法》总纲第一条规定：西藏是中华民国的领土。西藏地方政府和班禅的行政机构堪布厅的代表，还参加了南京国民政府于1946年召开的国民大会。
In order to form the first parliament of the Republic of China, the Beijing government promulgated on August 10, 1912 the Organic Law of the Parliament of the Republic of China and the law on elections for members of parliament. These statutes specified the methods for Tibetans to participate in elections, and the right of elected parliamentary members to have a direct say in government affairs. When the Chinese Kuomintang formed the national government in 1927 in Nanjing and held the national assembly in 1931, both the 13th Dalai Lama and the 9th Bainqen Erdeni sent representatives to participate. Article I of the General Outline of the Constitution for the Political Tutelage Period of the Republic of China, formulated during the assembly, stipulated that Tibet belonged to the territories of the Republic of China. The Tibetan local government and the Bainqen's administrative body, Kampus Assembly, also sent representatives to the national assembly in 1946 called by the Nanjing national government.
　　中华民国期间，中央政府一如元、明、清三朝，实行对西藏地方的治理。1912年中央政府设立蒙藏事务局（1914年5月改为蒙藏院），取代清朝的理藩院，主管西藏地方事务，并任命了中央驻藏办事长官，例行清朝驻藏大臣职权。南京国民政府成立后，于1929年设立蒙藏委员会，主管藏族、蒙古族等少数民族地区行政事宜。1940年4月，国民政府在拉萨设立蒙藏委员会驻藏办事处，作为中央政府在西藏的常设机构。
As in the previous Yuan, Ming and Qing dynasties, the central government of the Republic of China exercised jurisdiction over Tibet. The Bureau of Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs (renamed Mongolian and Tibetan Council in May 1914) was established by the central government in 1912 to replace the Qing Dynasty's Department in Charge of Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs. The bureau was responsible for Tibetan local affairs. The central government also appointed a representative to Tibet to carry out the responsibilities of the high commissioners stationed in Tibet by the Qing Dynasty. After the Nanjing national government was set up, a Commission for Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs was established in 1929 to handle the administrative affairs of the Tibetans, Mongolians and other ethnic minorities. In April 1940 the Commission for Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs opened an office in Lhasa as the permanent mission of the central government in Tibet.
　　依历史定制，达赖喇嘛、班禅额尔德尼以及其他大活佛，必须得到中央政府的认可和册封，他们在西藏地方才有政治上和宗教上的合法地位。民国期间，外患不已，内乱频仍，中央政府孱弱，但达赖喇嘛、班禅额尔德尼继续接受中央政府的册封。达赖、班禅等多次表示维护祖国统一，拥护中央政府。1919年，十三世达赖对北京中央政府派出的代表团说：“余亲英非出本心……余誓倾心内向，同谋五族幸福。”他在晚年（1930年）还曾表示，“吾所最希求者，即中国真正和平统一”，“都是中国领土，何分尔我”，“英人对吾确有诱惑之念，但吾知主权不可失”，公开表明“不亲英人，不背中央”的意旨（摘自刘曼卿著《康藏轺征》）。九世班禅在遗嘱中说，“余生平所发宏图，为拥护中央，宣扬佛化，促成五族团结，共保国运昌隆”。
Traditionally, the Dalai Lama, the Bainqen Erdeni and other high Living Buddhas had to be recognized and appointed by the central government in order to secure their political and religious legal status in Tibet. Despite the fact that incessant foreign aggression and civil wars weakened the central government of the Republic of China, it continued to grant honorific titles to the Dalai Lama and the Bainqen Erdeni. On many occasions the Dalai Lama and the Bainqen Erdeni expressed their support for national unification and for the central government. In 1919, the 13th Dalai Lama told a delegation sent by the Beijing central government, "It is not my true intention to be on intimate terms with the British.... I swear to be loyal to our own country and jointly work for the happiness of the five races." In his later years (in 1930), he said, "My greatest wish is for the real peace and unification of China." "Since it is all Chinese territory, why distinguish between you and us?" He further elaborated, "The British truly intend to tempt me, but I know that our sovereignty must not be lost." He also publicly expressed his determination "not to affiliate with the British nor forsake the central government" (Liu Manqing: A Mission to Xikang and Tibet). The 9th Bainqen noted in his will, "The great plan I have promoted all my life is the support of the central government, the spread of Buddhism, the promotion of the unity of the five nationalities and the guarantee of national prosperity."
　　1933年12月，十三世达赖喇嘛圆寂，西藏地方政府依传统旧制向中央呈报。国民政府派专使入藏致祭，并批准热振活佛为摄政，代行达赖喇嘛职权。对于寻觅十三世达赖转世灵童应遵循的办法，西藏地方政府都按照历来的规定一一呈报中央政府。现在的十四世达赖出生于青海省，原名拉木登珠，在他两岁时被选为转世灵童之一。1939年，经西藏地方政府呈报，中央政府指令青海省当局派军队把他护送至拉萨。1940年，当时任中央政府首脑的蒋介石，经特派蒙藏委员会委员长吴忠信到拉萨察看后，同意西藏地方摄政热振关于免于金瓶掣签的申请，由国民政府主席正式颁布命令，批准拉木登珠为十四世达赖喇嘛。
The death of the 13th Dalai Lama in December 1933 was reported to the central government by the Tibetan local government in the traditional manner. The national government sent a special envoy to Tibet for the memorial ceremony. It also approved the Living Buddha Razheng as the regent to assume the duties and power of the Dalai Lama. The Tibetan local government also followed the age-old system in reporting to the central government all the procedures that should be followed in search for the reincarnation of the late 13th Dalai Lama. The present 14th Dalai Lama was born in Qinghai Province. Originally named Lhamo Toinzhub, he was selected as one of the incarnate boys at the age of 2. After receiving a report submitted by the Tibetan local government in 1939, the central government ordered the Qinghai authorities to send troops to escort him to Lhasa. After an inspection tour in Lhasa by Wu Zhongxin, chief of the Commission for Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs, in 1940, Chiang Kai-shek, then head of the central government, approved Tibetan Regent Razheng's request to waive the lot-drawing convention, and the chairman of the national government issued an official decree conferring the title of the 14th Dalai Lama on Lhamo Toinzhub.
　　中华人民共和国
People's Republic of China
　　1949年，中国人民解放战争取得了决定性胜利，中华人民共和国成立。原在国民党政府统治下的北平、湖南以及与西藏相邻的云南、新疆、西康等省相继以和平方式解放，中央人民政府根据西藏的历史和现实情况，决定也采取和平解放的方针。1950年1月，中央政府正式通知西藏地方当局“派出代表到北京谈判西藏和平解放”。但是，当时控制西藏地方政府的摄政大扎·阿旺松饶等人，在某些外国势力的支持下，不顾国家和西藏人民利益，拒不接受中央政府进行和平谈判的号召。他们在西藏东部昌都一线调集藏军主力，布兵设防，企图以武力对抗。在这种形势下，中央政府不得不于1950年10月命令人民解放军渡过金沙江，解放了昌都。
The People's Republic of China was founded in 1949 after decisive victories in the Chinese People's War of Liberation. Beiping, Hunan and the provinces bordering on Tibet--Yunnan, Xinjiang and Xikang--were all liberated peacefully from the rule of the former Kuomintang government. In light of the history and reality of Tibet, the central people's government decided to do the same for Tibet. In January 1950, the central government formally notified the local authorities of Tibet to "send delegates to Beijing to negotiate the peaceful liberation of Tibet." However, the then Tibetan Regent Dagzhag Ngawang Sungrab and others who were in control of the Tibetan local government, supported by some foreign forces and disregarding the interests of the country and the Tibetans, rejected the central government's call for negotiation on the peaceful liberation of Tibet. They deployed the main body of the Tibetan army in the Qamdo area in east Tibet for armed resistance. Under such circumstances, the central government was left with no choice and had to order the People's Liberation Army (PLA) to cross the Jinsha River in October 1950, and Qamdo was liberated.
　　昌都解放后，中央政府再次敦促西藏地方政府派代表来北京判谈。中央政府坚持和平谈判的政策，给西藏爱国力量以巨大支持和鼓舞。以阿沛·阿旺晋美为代表的爱国上层人士力主和谈，得到了多数人的赞同和支持，提前亲政的十四世达赖喇嘛，接受了进行和平谈判的意见。1951年1月，达赖致信中央人民政府，信中说“余此次接受西藏全体人民热烈而诚恳的要求执政”、“决定和平达成人民之愿望”，派代表“向中央人民政府谋求解决西藏问题。”1951年2月，达赖喇嘛任命阿沛·阿旺晋美为首席全权代表，凯墨·索安旺堆、土丹旦达、土登列门和桑颇·登增顿珠等四人为代表，赴北京全权处理和中央人民政府谈判事宜。
Following this event, the central government once again urged the Tibetan local government to send delegates to Beijing for negotiations. The central government's adherence to the policy of peaceful negotiations greatly supported and inspired the patriotic forces in Tibet. The upper-class patriotics, represented by Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme, stood for peaceful negotiation, winning the endorsement and support of the majority. The 14th Dalai Lama who had assumed power ahead of time accepted the proposal. In his letter to the central people's government in January 1951, he said, "I have come to govern at the warm and earnest request of all Tibetans"; "I have decided to fulfill the people's desire through peaceful means"; and delegates would be sent "to seek a solution to the Tibetan issue with the central people's government." In February 1951, the Dalai Lama appointed Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme as his chief plenipotentiary and Kemai Soinam Wangdui, Tubdain Daindar, Tubdain Legmoin and Sampo Dainzin Toinzhub as delegates and sent them to Beijing to handle with full power the negotiations with the central people's government.
　　1951年5月23日，中央人民政府和西藏地方政府的代表就西藏和平解放的一系列问题达成协议，签订了《中央人民政府和西藏地方政府关于和平解放西藏办法的协议》（简称“十七条协议”）。协议规定，西藏人民团结起来，驱逐帝国主义侵略势力出西藏；西藏地方政府积极协助人民解放军进入西藏，巩固国防；西藏实行民族区域自治；西藏现行政治制度和达赖喇嘛、班禅额尔德尼的固有地位及职权，中央不予变更，各级官员照常供职；实行宗教信仰自由的政策，尊重西藏人民的宗教信仰和风俗习惯；逐步发展西藏民族的语言、文字和学校教育，以及农牧工商业，改善人民生活；西藏地区的涉外事宜，由中央统一管理。协议还明确规定，有关西藏的各项改革事宜，中央不加强迫，西藏地方政府自动进行改革。
On May 23, 1951, the Agreement of the Central People's Government and the Local Government of Tibet on Measures for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet (i.e., the 17-Article Agreement) was signed after the delegates of the central people's government and the Tibetan local government had reached agreement on a series of questions concerning Tibet's peaceful liberation. It was stipulated in the agreement that the Tibetan people should unite and drive out imperialist aggressive forces from Tibet; the local government of Tibet should actively assist the PLA in entering Tibet and consolidating national defense; national regional autonomy would be instituted in Tibet; the central government would not alter the existing political system in Tibet or the established status, functions and powers of the Dalai Lama and the Bainqen Erdeni, and officials of various ranks would continue to hold office as usual; the policy of freedom of religious belief would be upheld and the religious beliefs, customs and habits of the Tibetan people would be respected; the spoken and written language and school education of the Tibetan nationality would be developed step by step, along with agriculture, livestock raising, industry and commerce in order to improve the people's livelihood; foreign affairs involving the Tibet region would be under the unified management of the central people's government. The agreement also explicitly stipulated that in matters relating to reforms in Tibet, there would be no coercion on the part of the central authorities, and reform would be carried out by the Tibetan local government of its own accord.
　　和平解放西藏的协议受到西藏各民族人民的赞成和拥护。1951年9月26日至29日，西藏地方政府召开有全体僧俗官员、三大寺代表参加的大会，专门讨论协议问题。大会最后通过的给达赖的呈文说，“签订的十七条协议，对于达赖之宏业，西藏之佛法、政治、经济诸方面，大有裨益，无与伦比，理当遵照执行”。达赖喇嘛于10月24日致电毛泽东主席，表示“双方代表在友好基础上，已于1951年5月23日签订了关于和平解放西藏办法的协议。西藏地方政府及藏族僧俗人民一致拥护，并在毛主席及中央人民政府的领导下，积极协助人民解放军进藏部队，巩固国防，驱逐帝国主义势力出西藏，保护祖国领土主权的统一”。班禅和堪布厅也发表声明，指出协议“完全符合中国各族人民，特别是西藏民族人民的利益”。同年10月26日，人民解放军在西藏人民支持下，顺利进驻拉萨。
The agreement for the peaceful liberation of Tibet enjoyed the approval and support of the people from every ethnic group in Tibet. A conference of all ecclesiastic and secular officials and representatives of the three most prominent monasteries was called by the Tibetan local government between September 26 and 29, 1951 to specifically discuss the agreement. A report to the Dalai Lama was approved at the end of the conference. It stated, "The 17-Article Agreement that has been signed is of great and unrivaled benefit to the grand cause of the Dalai and to Buddhism, politics, economy and other aspects of life in Tibet. Naturally it should be implemented." The Dalai Lama sent a telegram to Chairman Mao Zedong on October 24, 1951, in which he wrote, "On the basis of friendship, delegates of the two sides signed on May 23, 1951 the Agreement on Measures for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet. The Tibetan local government as well as ecclesiastic and secular people unanimously support this agreement, and under the leadership of Chairman Mao and the central people's government, will actively assist the PLA troops entering Tibet in consolidating national defense, ousting imperialist influences from Tibet and safeguarding the unification of the territory and the sovereignty of the motherland." The Bainqen Lama and the Kampus Assembly also issued a statement, pointing out that the agreement "conforms fully to the interests of all ethnic nationalities of China, particularly those of the Tibetans." On October 26, with the support of the Tibetan people, the PLA entered Lhasa without a hitch.
　　西藏和平解放后，中央人民政府和西藏上层爱国力量为贯彻执行“十七条协议”做了大量工作。1954年，达赖、班禅联袂赴北京参加中华人民共和国第一届全国人民代表大会。达赖剌嘛在会上发言，对三年多来执行“十七条协议”所取得的成绩给予了充分肯定，对会议所审议的新中国第一部宪法草案中有关民族区域自治的原则和规定表示热烈拥护。在谈到宗教问题时，达赖喇嘛说：西藏人民具有很浓厚的宗教信仰，一些人制造的所谓“共产党、人民政府毁灭宗教”的谣言曾经使他们疑惑不安。但是现在，这种“挑拔离间的谣言已经全部破产了，西藏人民已经切身体会到了我们在宗教信仰上是有自由的。”他表示，要在中央人民政府的领导下，在各族人民帮助下，逐步把西藏建设成为繁荣幸福的地方。9月20日，达赖、班禅等西藏代表与出席会议的全国各族代表以投票表决方式通过了《中华人民共和国宪法》。在此次会议上，达赖喇嘛当选为全国人民代表大会常务委员会副委员长，班禅额尔德尼当选为全国人民代表大会常务委员会委员。他们作为国家领导成员，依照中国宪法，行使参与管理国家各项事务的权利。
After the peaceful liberation of Tibet, the central people's government and upper-class patriotic forces of Tibet did a great deal of work to implement the 17-Article Agreement. In 1954 the Dalai Lama and the Bainqen Erdeni came to Beijing to attend the First Session of the National People's Congress (NPC) of the People's Republic of China. In his speech at the congress, the Dalai Lama fully confirmed the achievements in the implementation of the 17-Article Agreement over the preceding three years, and expressed his warm support for the principles and provisions concerning national regional autonomy in the draft of New China's first Constitution, which was under discussion at the congress. Talking about religious issues, the Dalai Lama said that the Tibetan people had deeply held religious beliefs, and they were formerly made anxious by fallacious rumors spread by some people that "the Communist Party and the people's government will extinguish religion." However, he added, "the rumors that aim to sow discord have all been exploded and the Tibetan people know from our own experience that we have freedom of religious belief." He expressed the desire to gradually build Tibet into a land of prosperity and happiness under the leadership of the central people's government and with the help of people of other ethnic groups. On September 20, the Dalai Lama, the Bainqen Erdeni and the other Tibetan deputies, along with the deputies from other ethnic groups, approved the Constitution of the People's Republic of China by casting their ballots. At the session, the Dalai Lama was elected a vice-chairman of the NPC Standing Committee, and Bainqen Erdeni a member of the NPC Standing Committee. In their capacity as state leaders, they exercised their rights of participating in the management of state affairs in accordance with the Constitution.
　　1956年4月22日，达赖喇嘛就任西藏自治区筹备委员会主任委员，他在筹委会成立大会上致词说：“1951年我派代表到北京与中央人民政府代表进行谈判，在团结友爱的基础上，签订了《中央人民政府和西藏地方政府关于和平解放西藏办法的协议》。从此，西藏人民永远摆脱了帝国主义的奴役和羁绊，回到祖国大家庭，和祖国各兄弟民族人民一样，充分享受到民族平等的一切权利，开始走上了自由幸福的光明大道。”
On April 22, 1956, the Dalai Lama became chairman of the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. In his speech at the inaugural meeting, the Dalai Lama said, "In 1951, I sent delegates to Beijing to negotiate with delegates of the central people's government. On the basis of fraternal unity, the Agreement of the Central People's Government and the Local Government of Tibet on Measures for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet was signed. Since then, the Tibetan people shook off forever the fetters of imperialist enslavement and trammels and rejoined the large national family. Like our sibling races throughout the country, the Tibetan people fully enjoy all rights of national equality, and are embarking on a bright road of freedom and happiness."
所谓“西藏独立”的由来
 Origins of So-Called 'Tibetan Independence'
　　七百多年来，中国中央政府一直对西藏地方行使着主权，西藏地方从未成为一个独立国家。记载着七百多年来历史事实的数百万件汉藏文档案材料仍保存在北京、南京和西藏拉萨的档案馆中。世界上从未有任何一个国家的政府承认西藏是一个独立的国家。1904年，英国外交大臣兰斯顿发出的正式训令称，西藏为“中华帝国的一个省”。1954年，印度总理尼赫鲁在印度人民院的讲演中说：“在以往数百年中，我就不知道在任何时候，任何一个外面的国家曾经否认过中国在西藏的主权。”达赖集团和国际反华势力曾散布自1911年辛亥革命到1949年中华人民共和国成立，西藏已是一个“充分行使权力”的国家。历史事实驳斥了这种谎言。仅十四世达赖喇嘛要经国民政府批准方得继承这一点，就充分说明当时的西藏根本没有什么独立的权力。达赖集团和国际反华势力大肆鼓吹的所谓“西藏独立”，不过是近代历史上帝国主义侵略中国的产物。
For more than 700 years the central government of China has continuously exercised sovereignty over Tibet, and Tibet has never been an independent state. Now millions of files in both Chinese and Tibetan recording historical facts over more than seven centuries are being kept in the archives of Beijing, Nanjing and Lhasa. No government of any country in the world has ever recognized Tibet as an independent state. British Foreign Secretary Lord Lansdowne, in a formal instruction he sent out in 1904, called Tibet "a province of the Chinese Empire." In his speech at the Lok Sabba in 1954, Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru said, "Over the past several hundred years, as far as I know, at no time has any foreign country denied China's sovereignty over Tibet." The Dalai clique and overseas anti-China forces used to claim that between the 1911 Revolution and the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, Tibet became a country "exercising full authority." Historical facts refute such a fallacy. The simple reality that the installation of the 14th Dalai Lama needed the approval of the national government is sufficient proof that Tibet did not possess any independent power during that period. Therefore, the so-called "Tibetan independence" which the Dalai clique and overseas anti-China forces fervently propagate is nothing but a fiction of the imperialists who committed aggression against China in modern history.
　　帝国主义是怎样阴谋策划西藏独立的
How Have Imperialists Instigated Tibetan Independence?
　　在二十世纪初的藏语词汇中还没有“独立”这个词。1840年英帝国主义发动侵略中国的鸦片战争后，中国开始由一个独立的主权国家逐步沦为半殖民地国家。帝国主义势力乘清朝中央政府的虚弱，开始阴谋瓜分包括西藏在内的中国领土。
There was no such word as "independence" in the Tibetan vocabulary at the beginning of the 20th century. After the British imperialists started the Opium War of aggression against China in 1840, China was reduced from an independent sovereign country to a semi-colonial country. Imperialist forces took advantage of a weak Qing Dynasty and began plotting to carve up China, Tibet included.
　　为了把西藏纳入英国的势力范围，1888年、1903年，英国侵略者发动了两次侵略中国西藏的战争。西藏军民奋起抵抗但遭失败。在第二次侵藏战争中，英军一度攻占了拉萨，十三世达赖喇嘛被迫出走，侵略者迫使西藏地方政府官员签订了《拉萨条约》。但由于清朝政府外务部认为《拉萨条约》有损主权，清朝驻藏大臣不予签字，条约无效。
In order to bring Tibet into its sphere of influence, British aggressors invaded China's Tibet twice in 1888 and 1903. The Tibetan army and civilians rose to resist but were defeated. In the second aggressive war against Tibet, the British army occupied Lhasa, and the 13th Dalai Lama was forced to flee from the city. The invaders compelled the Tibetan local government officials to sign the Lhasa Convention. But because the Ministry of External Affairs of the Qing government believed the Lhasa Convention would do damage to national sovereignty, the high commissioner stationed in Tibet by the Qing government refused to sign it, leaving it ineffectual.
　　帝国主义靠直接军事侵略没有达到完全控制西藏的目的之后，就变换手法，开始策划把西藏从中国分裂出去的活动。1907年8月31日，英、俄帝国签订了《英俄同盟条约》，其中把中国在西藏的主权改称为“宗主权”。这是在国际文件中第一次把中国对西藏地方的主权篡改为“宗主权”。
After their failure to assume full control of Tibet through direct military incursion, the imperialists changed their tack and began plotting to separate Tibet from China. On August 31, 1907, Britain and Russia signed the Convention Between Great Britain and Russia, which changed China's sovereignty over Tibet into "suzerainty." This marked the first time Chin's sovereignty over Tibet was altered into "suzerainty" in international documents.
　　1911年，中国辛亥革命爆发。次年，英国利用清朝灭亡，民国初建，中国国内政局混乱之机，向中国外交部提出了否定中国对西藏主权的“五条”。在遭中国政府拒绝后，英国封闭了由印度进入西藏的一切道路。1913年，英政府又煽动西藏当局宣布独立，提出“西藏完全独立后，一切军械由英国接济”；“西藏承认英国派员来藏监督财政军事，以作英国扶助西藏独立报酬”；“民国军队行抵西藏，英国担负抵御之责”；“西藏执行开放主义，准英人自由行动”（摘自朱绣著《西藏六十年大事记》）。但英国的图谋未能得逞。
The year following the 1911 Revolution, Britain took advantage of the political chaos in China after the collapse of the Qing Dynasty and the new birth of the Republic of China, and put before the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs a five-point demand, indicating the denial of China's sovereignty over Tibet. When the Chinese government rejected the British demand, the British blocked all the roads leading from India to Tibet. In 1913 the British government inveigled the Tibetan authorities into declaring independence and proposed that "Britain be the weaponry supplier after total independence of Tibet;" "Tibet accept British envoys' supervision of Tibetan financial and military affairs in return for Britain's support of Tibetan independence;" "Britain be responsible for resisting the army of the Republic of China when it reaches Tibet;" "Tibet adopt an open policy and allow freedom of movement of the British." (Zhu Xiu: 60-Year Chronology of Tibet) However, Britain's schemes failed.
　　1913年，英国政府利用篡夺了中华民国大总统职位的袁世凯迫切要求得到各国外交承认和得到国际借款的心理，迫使北京政府参加英国政府提出的中、英、藏三方会议，即“西姆拉会议”。会前，英印政府派驻锡金政治专员柏尔单独会晤西藏地方政府参加会议的代表夏扎伦青，向他鼓吹“宗主权”具有“独立”的含义。柏尔在其所著《西藏之过去与现在》一书中自述：“当吾遇夏扎伦青于江孜时，吾劝其搜集所有关于昔日中藏交涉以及陆续为中国占领而西藏现今要求归还之各州县等项之文牍，携之赴会。”经过英国的唆使，西藏代表首次提出了“西藏独立”的口号，并提出“西藏疆域包括青海、理塘、巴塘等处并及打箭炉”等要求，当即遭到中国政府代表的拒绝。这时，英国代表按事先策划，提出了所谓的“折衷”方案，把中国藏族居住的所有地区划分为“内藏”、“外藏”两部分，“内藏”包括青海、甘肃、四川、云南等省的藏族居住地区，由中国政府直接管辖；“外藏”包括西藏和西康西部地区，要求中国政府“承认外藏自治”，“不干涉其内政”，“但中国仍派大臣驻拉萨，护卫部队限三百人”。这个“折衷”方案的实质，是把中国在西藏地方的主权篡改为所谓“宗主权”，使西藏在“自治”的名义下，脱离中国政府的管辖。如此无理的要求，当然遭到了全中国人民的强烈反对。1914年7月3日，中国政府代表陈贻范奉国内训示，拒绝在所谓“西姆拉条约”上签字，并且发表声明：“凡英国和西藏本日或他日所签订的条约或类似的文件，中国政府一概不能承认。”中国政府同时将此立场照会英国政府。会议遂以破裂告终。
In 1913, taking advantage of the fact that Yuan Shikai, who had usurped the presidency of the Republic of China, was eager to get foreign diplomatic recognition and international loans, the British government forced the Beijing government to participate in a tripartite conference of China, Britain and Tibet, namely the Simla Conference held at the behest of the British government. Before the conference, Charles Bell political officer sent to Sikkim by the British-Indian government, privately met with Lon-chen Shatra, the representative of the Tibetan local government to the conference. Bell trumpeted to Lon-chen Shatra that "suzerainty" implied "independence." In his book Tibet: Past and Present, Bell wrote, "When I met Lon-chen Shatra in Gyantse, I advised him to bring down all the documents which he could collect bearing on the Tibetan relationship to China in the past, and on the former's claims to the various provinces and districts which had from time to time been occupied by China." Stirred up by the British, the Tibetan representative raised the slogan of "Tibetan independence" for the first time. He also claimed "Tibetan territory includes Qinghai, Litang, Batang and Dajianlu." When these demands were rejected by the representative of the Chinese government, the British delegate introduced the pre-arranged "compromise" scheme, which divided China's Tibetan-inhabited areas into "inner Tibet" and "outer Tibet." "Inner Tibet," including Tibetan-inhabited areas in Qinghai, Gansu, Sichuan and Yunnan provinces, would be under the jurisdiction of the Chinese government. With regard to "outer Tibet," including Tibet and west Xikang, the Chinese government was requested to "recognize the autonomy of outer Tibet" and "refrain from interfering in its internal affairs;" "however, China may still send its high commissioner to Lhasa and maintain an escort army of no more than 300 soldiers." The essence of this "compromise" scheme was to change China's sovereignty over Tibet into "suzerainty," and separate Tibet from the authority of the Chinese government under the pretext of "autonomy." Naturally these unreasonable demands were strongly opposed by the Chinese people. On July 3, 1914, the Chinese government representative Chen Yifan upon instruction refused to sign the Simla Convention. In his statement, Chen said, "Government of China refuses to recognize any agreement which His Majesty's Government and Tibet might conclude independently either now or in the future." The Chinese government also sent a note to the British government, reiterating its position. Therefore, the conference broke down.
　　1942年夏，西藏地方政府在英国代表的支持下突然宣布成立“外交局”，公开进行“西藏独立”活动。消息传出，遭到全国人民的同声谴责，国民政府也发出严正警告，西藏地方政府迫于压力，不得不向国民政府报告改变原议。1947年3月在新德里举行“泛亚洲会议”，英帝国主义幕后策划邀请西藏派代表参加，在会场上悬挂的亚洲地图和万国旗中，把西藏作为一个独立国家对待。经中国代表团提出严重抗议后，会议组织者不得不改正。
In the summer of 1942, the Tibetan local government, with the support of the British representative, suddenly announced the establishment of a "foreign affairs bureau," and openly carried out "Tibetan independence" activities. These actions, as soon as they were made public, were condemned unanimously by the Chinese people. The national government also issued a stern warning. Under this pressure, the Tibetan local government had no choice but to withdraw its decision and reported the change to the national government. At the "Asian Relations Conference" held in New Delhi in March 1947, the British imperialists plotted behind the curtains to invite Tibetan representatives and even identified Tibet as an independent country on the map of Asia in the conference hall and in the array of national flags. The organizers were forced to rectify this after the Chinese delegation made serious protests.
　　1949年底前后，美国人劳尔·汤姆斯以“无线电评论员”名义在西藏探索“华盛顿给西藏以可能的援助”，并在美报刊上报道：“美国已准备承认西藏为独立自由”的国家。1950年上半年，一批美国枪支弹药经由加尔各答运入西藏，用以对抗中国解放军进藏。同年11月1日，美国国务卿艾奇逊公开诬蔑中国解放本国领土西藏的行动是“侵略”。同月，美国指使他国在联合国提出干涉中国西藏的提案。由于中国政府的严正立场和一些国家的反对，这个阴谋没有得逞。
Around the end of 1949, the American Lowell Thomas roamed Tibet in the guise of a "radio commentator" to explore the "possibility of aid that Washington could give Tibet." He wrote in a US newspaper: " The United States is ready to recognize Tibet as an independent and free country." In the first half of 1950, a load of American weaponry was shipped into Tibet through Calcutta in order to help resist the PLA's entry into Tibet. On November 1 of the same year, US Secretary of State Dean Acheson openly slandered China's liberation of its own territory of Tibet as "invasion." In the same month the United States prodded some other countries to propose a motion at the United Nations for intervention in China's Tibet. The scheme was unsuccessful in face of the stern stand of the Chinese government and the opposition of some countries.
　　一百多年来的历史事实清楚地说明，所谓“西藏独立”完全是新老帝国主义者出于攫取西藏的野心而挑动起来的。十四世达赖喇嘛早年曾指出：“帝国主义利用西藏人民反对满清和国民党反动政府的情绪，进行各种诱骗和挑拨，企图使西藏人民脱离祖国而处于他们的压迫和奴役之下。”
Historical facts over more than a century clearly demonstrate that so-called "Tibetan independence" was, in reality, cooked up by old and new imperialists out of their crave to wrest Tibet from China. The 14th Dalai Lama in his early years pointed out, "It was the imperialists who, taking advantage of the Tibetan people's antipathy to the Qing Dynasty and the reactionary Kuomintang government, attempted by enticement, deception and instigation to get the Tibetan people to separate from the motherland and come under their oppression and enslavement."
　　1959年武装判乱是怎样发生的
How Does the 1959 Armed Rebellion Occur?
　　和平解放前，西藏实行的是上层僧侣和贵族专政的封建农奴制，西藏的广大农奴迫切要求挣脱农奴制的枷锁。和平解放后，许多上中层的开明人士也认识到，如不改革旧制度，西藏民族断无繁荣昌盛的可能。中央人民政府考虑到西藏历史和现实的特殊情况，对西藏社会制度的改革采取了十分慎重的态度。“十七条协议”规定，这种改革中央不加强迫，由西藏地方政府自动进行。1957年1月，国务院总理周恩来访问印度期间又向达赖、班禅及随行的西藏地方政府主要官员转交了毛泽东主席的信，传达了中央的决定，在第二个五年计划期间（1958年—1962年）不搞改革，过六年之后是否改革，仍然由西藏根据那时的情况和条件决定。
Before peaceful liberation in 1951, Tibet was under a feudal serfdom characterized by the dictatorship of upper-class monks and nobles. The broad masses of serfs in Tibet eagerly wanted to break the shackles of serfdom. After the peaceful liberation, many enlightened people of the upper and middle classes also realized that if the old system was not reformed, the Tibetan people would never attain prosperity. In light of Tibetan history and the region's special situation, the central people's government adopted a very circumspect attitude toward the reform of the social system in Tibet. The 17-Article Agreement stipulated that the central government would not use coercion to implement such reform and that it was to be carried out by the Tibetan local government on its own. During his visit to India in January 1957, Premier Zhou Enlai of the State Council handed a letter from Chairman Mao Zedong to the Dalai Lama and Bainqen Lama and the accompanying Tibetan local government senior officials. The letter informed them of the decision of the central authorities that reform would not be conducted during the Second Five-Year Plan period (1958-62); whether reform should be conducted after six years would still be decided by Tibet according to its own situation and conditions then.
　　但是，西藏上层统治集团中的一些人根本反对改革，试图永远保持农奴制，以维护既得利益。他们蓄意违背和破坏“十七条协议”，变本加厉地进行分裂祖国的活动。1952年3、4月间，西藏地方政府的司曹鲁康娃和洛桑扎西暗中支持非法组织“人民会议”在拉萨骚乱闹事，反对“十七条协议”，提出人民解放军“撤出西藏”。1955年，西藏地方政府噶伦索康·旺清格勒等在当时的西康省藏区秘密策划煽动武装叛乱。1956年，该区叛乱开始，叛乱分子围攻地方政权机构，残杀工作人员和群众数百人。1957年5月在西藏地方政府噶伦柳霞·土登塔巴、先喀·居美多吉的支持下，成立了“四水六岗”叛乱组织，稍后又成立号称“卫教军”的叛乱武装，提出“西藏独立”及反对改革的口号，叛乱活动愈演愈烈。武装叛乱分子窜扰昌都、丁青、黑河、山南等地区，杀戮干部，破坏交通，袭击中央派驻当地的机关、部队，并到处抢掠财物，残害人民，奸淫妇女。乃东宗一个名叫东达八扎的商人，因不肯参加叛乱，叛乱分子把他和妻子抓起来，吊打过后，将东达八扎杀死，将他妻子强奸。当时的旧西藏地方政府也承认，很多群众因遭叛乱分子残害向他们告状，仅1958年8月，就有70多起。
However, some members of the Tibetan ruling class were hostile to reform and wanted to preserve the serfdom forever so as to maintain their own vested interests. They deliberately violated and sabotaged the 17-Article Agreement and intensified their efforts to split the motherland. Between March and April 1952, Sicab Lukangwa and Losang Zhaxi of the Tibetan local government gave secret support to the illicit organization "the people's conference" to oppose the 17-Article Agreement and create disturbance in Lhasa, demanding that the PLA "pull out of Tibet." In 1955, Galoin Surkang Wangqen Geleg of the Tibetan local government and others secretly plotted an armed rebellion in the Tibetan-inhabited area of Xikang Province. Rebellion broke out in that area in 1956 and the rebels besieged the local government institutions and massacred hundreds of government staff as well as common people. In May 1957, with the support of Galoins Neuxar Tubdain Tarba and Xainga Gyurme Doje, a rebel organization named "four rivers and six ranges" and later the rebel armed forces named "religion guards" were founded. They raised the slogan of "Tibetan Independence" and "opposition to reform" and further intensified their rebellious activities. The armed rebels harassed Qamdo, Dengqen, Heihe and Shannan. They killed cadres, disrupted communication lines, and attacked institutions and army troops stationed there by the central authorities. They looted, cruelly persecuted people and raped women. A merchant named Dongda Bazha in Nedong County was captured together with his wife because he refused to take part in the rebellion. The rebels tied up the couple and lashed them before killing the husband and raping his wife. The then Tibetan local government admitted that many Tibetan people lodged complaints against the rebels with it. In August 1958 alone, there were more than 70 complaints.
　　中央人民政府本着民族团结的精神，一再责成西藏地方政府负责惩办叛乱分子，维护社会治安，并对西藏地方政府的噶伦表示，“中央不改变西藏地区推迟改革的决定，并且在将来实行改革时仍要采取和平改革的方针”。但是西藏上层反动集团把中央这种仁至义尽的态度看作软弱可欺。他们宣称：“九年来，汉人动也不敢动我们最美妙最神圣的制度；我们打他们，他们只有招架之功，并无还手之力；只要我们从外地调一大批武装到拉萨，一打汉人准跑；如果不跑，我们就把达赖佛爷逼往山南，聚集力量，举行反功，夺回拉萨；最后不行，就跑印度”。
The central people's government, in the spirit of national unity, repeatedly urged the Tibetan local government to punish the rebels to maintain public order. Meanwhile, it told the Galoins of the Tibetan local government, "The central government will not change its decision on postponing reform in Tibet and in the future, when the reform is conducted, the policy to be followed will still be one of peaceful reform." However, the reactionary clique of the upper social strata in Tibet took the extreme forbearance of the central government as a sign of weakness and easiness to bully. They declared, "For nine years, the Hans have not dared to touch our most glorious and sacrosanct system. When we attacked them, they could only parry our blows without being able to strike back. So long as we transfer a large number of troops to Lhasa from outside, the Hans will surely flee at the first blow. If they don't run away, we will carry His Holiness the Dalai Lama to Shannan, and gather our strength there to launch a counter-attack and seize back Lhasa. If all these efforts fail, we can go to India."
　　西藏的武装叛乱，从开始就得到国外反华势力的支持。美国人诺曼·C·霍尔著《美国、西藏和中国》披露，1957年，美国中央情报局从旅居国外的藏人中挑选六名青年，送美国的关岛，接受识图、收发报、射击和跳伞训练。此后，美国又在科罗拉多州海尔营地分批训练“康巴游击队员”达170人，经训练的“康巴游击队员”被分批空投或潜回西藏，“建立有效的抵抗运动”，“反对中国人的占领”。1975年9月5日香港出版的《远东经济评论》所载《美国中央情报局对西藏的阴谋》一文记述：1958年5月，首批受美训练的两名特务携带电台到叛乱头目恩珠仓·公布扎西设在山南的总部与美国中央情报局联系。不久，美国即在哲古地区空投一批武器弹药给叛乱分子，计轻机枪20挺，迫击炮2门，步枪100支，手榴弹600枚，炮弹600发，子弹近4万发。这一时期，美国还从陆路偷运大批武器弹药供给盘踞山南的叛乱分子。
The armed rebellion in Tibet was supported from the beginning by foreign anti-China forces. In his book The United States, Tibet and China American Norman C. Hall reveals that in 1957 the CIA culled six young men from among Tibetans residing abroad and sent them to Guam of the United States to receive training in map-reading, radio transmission, shooting and parachuting. Subsequently, the United States trained 170 "Kamba guerrillas" in batches in Hale Camp, Colorado. The trained "Kamba guerrillas" were air-dropped or sneaked into Tibet to "launch an effective resistance movement" to "oppose the Chinese occupation." An article entitled The CIA Tibetan Conspiracy in the Hong Kong-based Far Eastern Economic Review disclosed in its September 5 issue of 1975 that in May 1958, two agents trained by the Americans in the first batch brought a transceiver to the headquarter set up by the rebel leader Anzhugcang Goinbo Zhaxi in Shannan to make contact with the CIA. Before long, the United States air-dropped arms and ammunition, including 20 sub-machine guns, two mortars, 100 rifles, 600 hand-grenades, 600 artillery shells and close to 40,000 bullets, to the rebels in the plateau called Chigu Lama Thang. During the same period, the United States clandestinely shipped large amounts of arms and ammunition overland to the rebels entrenched in the Shannan area.
　　在西藏顽固坚持农奴制度的农奴主和国外反华势力相互勾结下，叛乱活动迅速蔓延。1959年3月10日在拉萨发生的全面武装叛乱，就是经精心策划而挑起的。
With the collusion of the Tibetan serf-owners bent on retaining serfdom and the foreign anti-China forces, the rebellious activities soon became rampant. The climax was the elaborately planned armed rebellion in Lhasa on March 10, 1959.
　　2月7日，达赖喇嘛主动向西藏军区副司令员邓少东等提出：“听说西藏军区文工团在内地学习回来后演出的节目很好，我想看一次，请你们给安排一下。”邓少东等当即表示欢迎，并请达赖确定演出时间、地点，同时将达赖的这一愿望告诉了西藏地方政府的索康等噶伦和达赖的副官长帕拉·土登为登等人。3月8日，达赖确定3月10日下午3时到西藏军区礼堂看演出。西藏军区方面为此作了认真周到的接待准备工作。3月9日晚，拉萨墨本（市长）却煽动市民说：达赖喇嘛明天要去军区赴宴、看戏，汉人准备了飞机，要把达赖喇嘛劫往北京；每家都要派人到达赖喇嘛驻地罗布林卡请愿，请求他不要去军区看戏。次日晨，叛乱分子胁迫2000多人去罗布林卡，又散布“军区要毒死达赖喇嘛”的谣言，呼喊“西藏独立”、“赶走汉人”的口号。叛乱分子当场打伤西藏地方政府卸任噶伦、时任西藏军区副司令员的桑颇·才旺仁增，用石头将爱国进步人士、自治区筹委会委员堪穷帕巴拉·索朗降措活活打死，并拴在马尾上拖尸到市中心示众。随后，叛乱头目连续召开所谓“人民代表会议”、“西藏独立国人民会议”，加紧组织和扩大叛乱武装。他们公开撕毁“十七条协议”，宣布“西藏独立”，全面发动了背叛祖国的武装叛乱。
On February 7, the Dalai Lama took the initiative and said to Deng Shaodong, deputy commander of the Tibet Military Area Command, and other officers, "I was told that after its return from studies in the hinterland, the Song and Dance Ensemble under the Tibet Military Area Command has a very good repetoire. I would like to see its show. Please arrange it for me." Deng and the other officers expressed immediate readiness and asked the Dalai Lama to fix the time and place for performance. They also conveyed the Dalai Lama's wish to Surkang and other Galoins of the Tibetan local government and Paglha Tubdain Weidain, adjutant general of the Dalai Lama. On March 8, the Dalai Lama said he would go to the performance in the Tibet Military Area Command Auditorium at 3 pm on March 10. The Tibet Military Area Command carefully prepared for the occasion. But on the evening of March 9, the Miboin (mayor) of Lhasa provoked citizens by saying: tomorrow the Dalai Lama will go to the Military Area Command for a banquet and a performance; the Hans have prepared a plane to kidnap the Dalai Lama to Beijing; every household should send people to Norbu Lingka, the residence of the Dalai Lama, to petition him not to attend the performance in the Military Area Command. The next morning, the rebels coerced more than 2,000 people to mass at Norbu Lingka, spreading the rumor that "the Military Area Command is planning to poison the Dalai Lama" and shouting slogans such as "Tibetan Independence" and "Away with the Hans." The rebels hit and wounded Sampo Cewang Rinzin, a former Galoin of the Tibetan local government and then a deputy commander of the Tibet Military Area Command. They stoned to death Kainqoin Pagbalha Soinam Gyamco, a progressive patriot and member of the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. His body was tied to the tail of a horse and dragged through downtown as a warning. Subsequently, the rebel leaders convened the so-called "people's congress" and "people's conference of the independent state of Tibet," intensifying their efforts to organize and expand armed rebellion. They brazenly tore up the 17-Article Agreement and declared "the independence of Tibet," launching a full-scale armed rebellion against the motherland.
　　虽然罗布林卡受到叛乱分子控制，同达赖喇嘛的联系十分困难，中央代理代表谭冠三仍设法通过爱国人士先后于3月10日、11日和15日给达赖喇嘛三封信。谭冠三在信中表示体谅达赖喇嘛的处境，关心他的安全，并指出叛乱分子猖獗地进行军事挑衅，要求西藏地方政府立即予以制止。达赖喇嘛亦于3月11日、12日和16日先后给谭冠三复信三封。信中说：“反动的坏分子们正借口保护我的安全而进行危害我的活动，对此我正设法平息。”“反动集团的违法行为，使我无限忧伤……以保护我的安全为名而制造的严重离间中央与地方关系的事件，我正尽一切可能设法处理。”在16日的信中，他还表示，已对地方政府官员等进行了“教育”和“严厉地指责”，并表示几天后还可能到军区去。达赖喇嘛这三封亲笔信的原件曾由新华社记者摄成照片公开发表，现仍保存完好。
Although Norbu Lingka was controlled by the rebels and it was hard to make contact with the Dalai Lama, acting representative of the central government Tan Guansan managed to send three letters to the Dalai Lama on March 10, 11 and 15 through patriots. In them, Tan expressed his understanding of the Dalai Lama's situation as well as his concern for the latter's safety. He pointed out that the rebels were making reckless military provocations and demanded that the Tibetan local government immediately work to stop them. The Dalai Lama penned three letters in reply to Tan on March 11, 12 and 16. In his letters, the Dalai Lama wrote, "Reactionary, evil elements are carrying out activities endangering me under the pretext of ensuring my safety. I am taking measures to calm things down." "The unlawful activities of the reactionary clique cause me endless worry and sorrow.... As to the incidents of yesterday and the day before, which were brought about under the pretext of ensuring my safety and have seriously estranged relations between the central people's government and the local government, I am making every possible effort to deal with them." In the letter of March 16, he said that he had "educated" and "severely criticized" officials of the Tibetan local government. He also expressed the desire to still go to the Military Area Command a few days later. All three letters of the Dalai Lama have been photographed by reporters of the Xinhua News Agency and published, and are still well preserved.
　　但是，3月17日夜，噶伦索康、柳霞、夏苏等叛乱头目挟持达赖喇嘛逃离拉萨，前往叛乱武装的“根据地”山南。叛乱失败后，又逃往印度。
However, on the evening of March 17, Galoins Surkang, Neuxar and Xaisur and other rebel leaders held the Dalai Lama under duress and carried him away from Lhasa to Shannan, the "base" of the armed rebel forces. When the armed rebellion failed, they fled to India.
　　达赖喇嘛离开拉萨后，叛乱分子调集约7000人，于3月20日凌晨向党政军机关发动全面进攻。人民解放军在忍无可忍，让无可让的情况下，于当日上午10日奉命进行反击。在藏族爱国僧俗人民的支持下，仅用两天时间，就彻底平息了拉萨市区的叛乱。以后又平息了叛乱分子长期盘踞的山南地区的叛乱。流窜于其他地区的叛乱武装也相继瓦解。
After the Dalai Lama left Lhasa, about 7,000 rebels gathered to wage a full-scale attack on the Party, government and army institutions before dawn on March 20. The PLA, driven beyond its forbearance, launched under orders a counterattack at 10 am the same day. With the support of patriotic Tibetan monks and lay people, the PLA completely put down the armed rebellion in Lhasa within two days. Before long, the PLA suppressed the armed rebellion in Shannan, where the rebels had been entrenched for a long time. Armed rebel forces who fled to other places were dissolved.
　　人民解放军在平叛过程中军纪严明，得到广大僧俗人士的衷心拥护。他们主动配合人民解放军平息叛乱，各地群众纷纷组织自卫队、联防队、保畜队等自卫性组织，为平叛大军修路、运输、送信、引路、烧茶送水、站岗放哨、救治伤员，使叛乱分子陷于孤立。
The PLA was highly disciplined in the course of quelling the rebellion and this won the wholehearted support of Buddhist monks and laymen. They took the initiative to help the PLA in putting down the rebellion. Various self-defense, joint-defense, livestock protection and other forms of joint-defense teams sprang up in various places to build roads, provide transport, dispatch mail, serve as guides, boil tea, send water, stand sentry and give first-aid to wounded PLA soldiers, effectively isolating the rebels.
达赖集团的分裂活动和中央政府的政策
 The Dalai Clique's Separatist Activities and the Central Government's Policy 
　　达赖集团是怎样进行分裂活动的
How Does the Dalai Clique Carry Out His Separatist Activities? 
　　达赖喇嘛逃亡国外后，中央政府从维护祖国统一和民族团结的大局出发，对他采取了耐心等待的态度。他的全国人大常委会副委员长职务，一直保留到1964年。但是达赖喇嘛在国外反华势力和西藏分裂主义分子的包围下，完全背弃了自己曾经表示过的爱国立场，从事了大量分裂祖国的活动。
Starting from the point of maintaining the unification of the motherland and national unity, the central government adopted an attitude of patient waiting towards the Dalai Lama after he fled abroad. His position as a vice-chairman of the NPC Standing Committee was preserved until 1964. However, surrounded by foreign anti-China forces and Tibetan separatists, the Dalai Lama completely renounced the patriotic stand which he once expressed and engaged in numerous activities to split the motherland.
　　公开鼓吹“西藏是独立国家”。1959年6月，达赖在印度穆索里发表声明，称“西藏实际上曾经一向是独立的”。1991年3月，达赖访问英国时向报界宣称，西藏“是当今世界上被占领的一个最大的国家”。他多次妄称“实现西藏独立的任务落到我们西藏境内外全体西藏人民的身上。”
 Publicly advocating that "Tibet is an independent state." In June 1959, the Dalai Lama issued a statement in Mussoorie, India which read "Tibet had actually been independent." In March 1991, during his visit to Britain, the Dalai Lama told the press that Tibet "is the biggest occupied country in the world today." He proclaimed on many occasions that "the task of realizing the independence of Tibet has fallen upon all Tibetans in and outside Tibet."
　　成立“流亡政府”。六十年代初期，达赖集团在印度达兰萨拉召开“西藏人民代表大会”，成立了所谓“西藏流亡政府”，颁布所谓“宪法”，规定“由达赖任国家首脑”，“大臣由达赖任命”，“政府的一切工作均应由达赖同意方被认可”。1991年达赖集团修改后的所谓“宪法”中，仍规定达赖是“国家首脑”。达赖及其所谓“流亡政府”向国外藏胞长期征收“独立税”，在一些国家设立“办事机构”，出版发行宣扬“西藏独立”的刊物和书籍，从事“西藏独立”的政治活动。
 Setting up the "government in exile." In the early 1960s, the Dalai clique convened the "people's congress of Tibet" in Dharamsala, India, which established the so-called "Tibetan government in exile." A so-called "constitution" was promulgated, which states that "the Dalai Lama is the head of state," "the ministers shall be appointed by the Dalai Lama" and "all work of the government shall not be approved without the consent of the Dalai Lama." The 1991 revised "constitution" of the Dalai clique still stipulates that the Dalai is "the head of the state." The Dalai Lama and his so-called "government in exile" kept levying an "independence tax" on Tibetans residing abroad, established "offices" in some countries, published magazines and books advocating "Tibetan independence" and engaged in political activities for "Tibetan independence."
　　重新组建叛乱武装。1960年9月，达赖集团在尼泊尔木斯塘重新组建了“四水六岗卫教军”，在中国边境进行了长达十年之久的军事袭扰活动，其首任总指挥恩珠仓·公布扎西在其回忆录《四水六岗》中写道，“组织了一系列向中国哨所的进攻”，“有时，一二百人的西藏游击队的活动深入中国占领区达一百英里”。达赖撰文对公布扎西大肆赞扬。
 Reorganizing the armed rebel forces. In September 1960, the Dalai clique re-organized the "religion guards of the four rivers and six ranges" in Mustang, Nepal, which carried on military harassment activities along the Chinese border for ten years. Its first commander-in-chief Anzhugcang Goinbo Zhaxi wrote in his memoirs Four Rivers and Six Ranges that "a series of attacks were organized on Chinese outposts" and "sometimes, 100 or 200 Tibetan guerrillas went as far as 100 miles into the area occupied by the Chinese." The Dalai Lama wrote articles praising Goinbo Zhaxi.
　　造谣诽谤，策动骚乱。达赖在出国后的三十多年里，不顾事实，编造了大量诸如“‘十七条协议’是武力逼迫下强加给西藏的”；“汉人屠杀了120万藏人”；“由于汉人移民，藏族在西藏成了少数”；“共产党在西藏强行对妇女实行计划生育、堕胎”；政府反对宗教自由，迫害宗教人士；藏族传统文化艺术遭到灭绝危险；西藏自然资源受到严重破坏；西藏环境受到污染等等谎言，蓄意挑拨民族关系，煽动西藏群众反对中央政府。1987年9月至1989年3月拉萨发生的多起骚乱事件，就是在达赖集团的煽动和派遣回藏的叛乱分子策划下挑起的，这些骚乱给西藏人民的生命财产造成严重损失。
Spreading rumors and calumnies and plotting riots. Ignoring facts, the Dalai Lama fabricated numerous lies to sow dissension among the various nationalities and incite the Tibetan people to oppose the central government during his 30-year self-exile abroad. He said that "the 17-Article Agreement was imposed on Tibet under armed force"; "the Hans have massacred 1.2 million Tibetans"; "owing to Han immigration, the Tibetans have become a minority in Tibet"; "the Communists in Tibet force women to practice birth control and abortion"; the government opposes religious freedom and persecutes religious people; traditional Tibetan culture and art are in danger of extinction; the natural resources in Tibet have been seriously depleted; there is severe environmental pollution in Tibet, etc. The riots in Lhasa from September 1987 to March 1989 were incited by the Dalai clique and plotted by rebels who were sent back to Tibet. The riots incurred severe losses to the lives and property of Tibetans.
　　达赖的言行表明，他并不象他自己所声称的那样，仅仅是一个宗教领袖，而已成为在国外长期从事分裂祖国活动的政治头目。
The Dalai's words and deeds have showed that he is no longer only a religious leader as he claims. On the contrary, he has become the political leader engaged in long-term divisive activities abroad.
　　“西藏独立”不容讨论
'Tibetan Independence' Brooks No Discussion
　　中央政府对达赖喇嘛的政策是一贯的，希望他放弃分裂，回到爱国统一的立场上来。
The central government has adopted a consistent policy towards the Dalai Lama. It urges him to renounce separatism and return to the stand of patriotism and unity.
　　1978年12月28日，中国领导人邓小平在会见美联社记者时说，“达赖可以回来，但他要作为中国公民”，“我们的要求就一个——爱国，而且我们提出爱国不分先后”，表明了中央政府欢迎达赖喇嘛回归祖国的态度。
On December 28, 1978, the Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping said to AP correspondents that "the Dalai Lama may return, but only as a Chinese citizen"; "we have but one demand -- patriotism. And we say that anyone is welcome, whether he embraces patriotism early or late." This indicates the central government's attitude of welcoming the Dalai Lama back to the motherland.
　　1979年2月28日达赖喇嘛派代表回国与中央政府进行接触。3月12日，邓小平在会见达赖喇嘛的代表时明确表示：“欢迎达赖喇嘛回来，回来以后还可以出去”。对于中央政府同达赖喇嘛方面谈判的问题，邓小平明确指出：“现在是以西藏作为一个国家与中央对话，还是西藏是中国的一部分来讨论处理一些问题？这是个现实问题。”“根本问题是，西藏是中国的一部分，对与不对，要用这个标准来判断。”
The Dalai Lama sent representatives to Beijing to contact the central government on February 28, 1979. On March 12, Deng Xiaoping met the Dalai Lama's representatives and said to them, "The Dalai Lama is welcome to come back. He can go out again after his return." With regard to the central government's negotiation with the side of the Dalai Lama, Deng pointed out, "Now, whether the dialogue to discuss and settle problems will be between the central government and Tibet as a state or Tibet as a part of China? This is a practical question." "Essentially Tibet is a part of China. This is the criterion for judging right or wrong."
　　为了通过谈判，促成达赖喇嘛及其追随者放弃分裂主张，回归祖国，中央政府进行了种种努力。自1980年以来，中央领导人多次接见了达赖喇嘛派回的代表，多次重申中央对于达赖喇嘛的政策。
The central government did everything possible to persuade the Dalai Lama and his followers, through negotiations, to give up their separatism and return to the motherland. The central government leaders have since 1980 met a number of delegations sent back by the Dalai Lama and reiterated on many occasions the central government's policy towards the Dalai Lama.
　　为了满足国内外藏族群众之间探亲和交往的要求，中央政府制定和实行了来去自由的政策，并表明了爱国一家，爱国不分先后，既往不咎的态度。从1979年8月到1980年9月，中央政府有关部门接待了达赖喇嘛先后派出的三批参观团和两批亲属回国参观。达赖喇嘛在国外的大部分亲属曾回国参观、探亲，自1979年以来，西藏和其他藏区已经接待了回国探亲、参观旅游的国外藏胞8000余人，安置了回国定居的藏胞近2000人。
To satisfy the desire of both local and overseas Tibetans for visits and contacts, the central government has formulated and practiced the policy of free movement in and out of the country. It has also made clear that all patriots belong to one big family, whether they rally to the common cause now or later, and bygones can be bygones. From August 1979 to September 1980, central government departments concerned received three visiting delegations and two groups of relatives sent by the Dalai Lama. Most of the Dalai Lama's kin residing abroad have made return visits to China. Since 1979, Tibet and other Tibetan-inhabited areas have received some 8,000 overseas Tibetans who came to visit relatives or for sightseeing, and helped settle nearly 2,000 Tibetan compatriots.
　　令人遗憾的是，达赖不仅没有接受中央的好意，反而变本加厉地进行分裂活动。1987年9月，达赖在美国国会人权小组委员会发表了所谓西藏地位问题的“五点计划”，继续鼓吹“西藏独立”，煽动和策划了拉萨的多次严重骚乱事件。1988年6月，达赖提出了所谓解决西藏问题的“斯特拉斯堡建议”，这个建议以所谓西藏历来是独立国家为前提，将一国内部的民族区域自治问题变成所谓的宗主国与附庸国、保护国与被保护国的关系，否认中国对西藏的主权，变相搞西藏独立。这原是帝国主义为了瓜分中国玩弄过的阴谋，当然受到中央政府的拒绝。中央明确表示：“中国对西藏的主权不容否定，西藏独立不行，半独立不行，变相独立也不行。”
Regretfully, the Dalai Lama did not draw on the good will of the central government. Instead, he further intensified his separatist activities. At a meeting of the Human Rights Subcommittee of the US Congress held in September 1987, the Dalai Lama put forward a "five-point proposal" regarding the so-called status of Tibet. He continued to advocate "Tibetan Independence," and instigate and plot a number of riots in Lhasa. In June 1988, the Dalai Lama raised a so-called "Strasbourg proposal" for the solution of the Tibet issue. On the premise that Tibet "had always been" an independent state, the proposal interpreted the issue of a regional national autonomy within a country as a relationship between a suzerain and a vassal state, and between a protector and a protected state, thus denying China's sovereignty over Tibet and advocating the independence of Tibet in a disguised way. The central government naturally rejected the proposal, because it was a conspiracy the imperialists once hatched in order to carve up China. The Chinese government solemnly declared, "China's sovereignty over Tibet brooks no denial. Of Tibet there could be no independence, nor semi-independence, nor independence in disguise."
　　尽管如此，中央政府仍然希望达赖悬崖勒马，回心转意。1989年初，班禅大师圆寂，考虑到历世达赖、班禅互为师徒的历史宗教关系，经中央政府同意，中国佛教协会邀请达赖喇嘛回国参加班禅大师的追悼活动。中国佛教协会会长赵朴初亲自将邀请信交到达赖喇嘛的私人代表手中。这给达赖喇嘛提供了一个在流亡三十年之后，同国内佛教界人士见面的良机。然而，达赖喇嘛拒绝了这次邀请。
Nevertheless, the central government still hopes that the Dalai Lama would rein in at the brink of the precipice and change his mind. In early 1989, the 10th Bainqen Lama passed away. Taking into account the historical religious ties between various generations of the Dalai Lama and the Bainqen Lama as teacher and student, the Buddhist Association of China, with the approval of the central government, invited the Dalai Lama to come back to attend the Bainqen Lama's memorial ceremonies. President Zhao Puchu of the association handed a letter of invitation to a personal representative of the Dalai Lama, providing the Dalai Lama with a good opportunity to meet with people in the Buddhist circles in China after 30 years of exile. But the Dalai Lama rejected the invitation.
　　1989年，在新的国际反华风浪中，挪威诺贝尔和平奖委员会怀着明显的政治目的，把1989年诺贝尔和平奖授予达赖喇嘛。达赖和西藏分裂主义分子得到了极大的支持。此后，达赖周游世界，到处鼓吹分裂。
As 1989 witnessed a new international anti-China wave, the Nobel Peace Prize Committee in Norway, with clearly political motives, awarded the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize to the Dalai Lama, giving its strong support to the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan separatists. Since then, the Dalai Lama has travelled the world, advocating Tibet's separation from China.
　　与此同时，达赖喇嘛进一步加紧煽动和策划西藏地区的骚乱活动。1990年1月19日，他通过英国的广播说：如果北京政府一年之内不开始会谈他的西藏自治计划，他将不得不改变对中国妥协的立场，很多年轻的西藏人主张使用武力。1991年4月4日，达赖通过“美国之音”藏语广播说：“要进一步加强西藏独立的所有事情”1991年10月10日，达赖又通过“美国之音”藏语节目进行煽动说：“当前大批汉人涌入西藏，使很多藏族青年找不到工作，这对西藏社会造成更加不安定的因素，因此再次爆发动乱的可能性很大。”
The Dalai Lama simultaneously intensified his efforts to incite and plot riots in Tibet. On January 19, 1990, he said over the BBC: If the Beijing government fails to hold talks with him on his plan of Tibet's autonomy within a year, he will have to change his stand of compromise with China; many young Tibetans stand for the use of force. On April 4, 1991, the Dalai Lama said in the Tibetan language program of the Voice of America, "All matters shall be further strengthened for Tibet's independence." Again on October 10 the same year, he tried instigation in a similar program, "At present, so large a number of Hans are pouring into Tibet that many young Tibetans cannot find jobs. This adds a further element of instability in the Tibetan society. Therefore, new riots are quite possible."
　　正是由于达赖喇嘛一直不肯放弃“西藏独立”的主张，继续在国内外进行分裂祖国的活动，使中央政府和达赖喇嘛代表的接触没有取得成果。
It is because the Dalai Lama sticks to his position of "Tibetan independence" and continues his efforts to split the motherland in and outside China that contacts between the central government and the representatives of the Dalai Lama have yielded no results.
　　1991年5月19日，中华人民共和国国务院总理李鹏在西藏和平解放四十周年前夕答新华社记者问中指出：“中央政府对达赖喇嘛的政策是一贯的，现在也没有变化。我们的根本原则只有一条，即西藏是中国不可分割的一部分。在这个根本问题上没有任何付价还价的余地。中央政府一贯表示愿意同达赖喇嘛进行接触，但是达赖喇嘛必须停止从事分裂祖国的活动，改变‘西藏独立’的立场，除了‘西藏独立’不能谈，其他问题都可以谈。”
In an interview with Xinhua News Agency reporters on May 19, 1991, on the eve of the 40th anniversary of Tibet's peaceful liberation, Premier Li Peng of the State Council of the People's Republic of China pointed out, "The central government's policy towards the Dalai Lama has been consistent and remains unchanged. We have only one fundamental principle, namely, Tibet is an inalienable part of China. On this fundamental issue there is no room for haggling. The central government has always expressed its willingness to have contact with the Dalai Lama, but he must stop activities to split the motherland and change his position for 'Tibetan independence.' All matters except 'Tibetan independence' can be discussed."
　　中央政府愿意与达赖喇嘛接触谈判的大门始终是敞开的。中央政府对达赖喇嘛的政策也是十分明确的。为了对历史负责，对中华民族负责，对包括西藏人民在内的十一亿中国人民负责，中央政府在维护祖国统一这个基本问题上决不会有丝毫让步。企图依靠外国势力达到“西藏独立”、分裂祖国的活动是背叛祖国、背叛包括藏族在内的整个中华民族的可耻行径，中央政府坚决加以谴责，决不允许其得逞。中央政府将继续执行建设西藏、发展西藏的一系列特殊政策和优惠措施，以增强民族团结，繁荣经济文化，改善人民生活。任何破坏西藏安定团结的活动，任何制造骚乱、策动闹事的违法行为，都是违背西藏人民根本利益的，必将受到严厉的打击。
The central government is willing to contact and negotiate with the Dalai Lama; the door remains open. The central government's policy towards the Dalai Lama is also clear. To be responsible for the history, the Chinese nation and its 1.1 billion people, including the Tibetan people, the central government will make not the slightest concession on the fundamental issue of maintaining the motherland's unification. Any activity attempting to realize "Tibetan independence" and split the motherland by relying on foreign forces is an ignominious move betraying the motherland and the whole Chinese nation including the Tibetan nationality. The central government resolutely denounces this kind of action and will never allow it to succeed. The central government will continue to implement a series of special policies and preferential measures to promote the construction and development of Tibet so as to enhance national unity, construct a prosperous economy, enrich culture and improve the people's livelihood. Any activity sabotaging stability and unity in Tibet and any unlawful deed creating disturbance and inciting riots runs against the basic interests of the Tibetan people and will be cracked down on relentlessly.
　　只要达赖喇嘛放弃分裂主张，承认西藏是中国不可分割的一部分，中央政府随时愿意与达赖喇嘛进行谈判，热诚欢迎达赖喇嘛早日回归祖国，为维护祖国统一和民族团结，为西藏人民的富裕、幸福做些有益的事情。
So long as the Dalai Lama can give up his divisive stand and admit that Tibet is an inalienable part of China, the central government is willing to hold talks at any time with him. The Dalai Lama is warmly welcome to return to the embrace of the motherland at an early date and do some work that is conducive to maintaining the motherland's unification, the national unity, as well as the affluent and happy lives of the Tibetan people.
旧西藏的封建农奴制
 Feudal Serfdom in Old Tibet
　　1959年民主改革前，西藏长期处于政教合一、僧侣和贵族专政的封建农奴制社会，其黑暗、残酷比中世纪欧洲的农奴制度有过之而无不及。西藏的农奴主主要是官家、贵族和寺院上层僧侣三大领主。他们不到西藏人口的5%，却占有西藏的全部耕地、牧场、森林、山川以及大部分牲畜。据十七世纪清朝初年统计，当时西藏实有耕地300多万克（15克相当于一公顷），其中官家占30.9%，贵族占29.6%，寺庙和上层僧侣占39.5%。1959年民主改革前，全西藏有世袭贵族197家，大贵族25家，其中最大的贵族有七、八家，每家占有几十个庄园，几万克土地。
Before the Democratic Reform of 1959 Tibet had long been a society of feudal serfdom under the despotic religion-political rule of lamas and nobles, a society which was darker and more cruel than the European serfdom of the Middle Ages. Tibet's serf-owners were principally the three major estate-holders: local administrative officials, nobles and upper-ranking lamas in monasteries. Although they accounted for less than 5 percent of Tibet's population, they owned all of Tibet's farmland, pastures, forests, mountains and rivers as well as most livestock. Statistics released in the early years of the Qing Dynasty in the 17th century indicate that Tibet then had more than 3 million ke of farmland (15 ke equal to 1 hectare), of which 30.9 percent was owned by officials, 29.6 percent by nobles, and 39.5 percent by monasteries and upper-ranking lamas. Before the 1959 Democratic Reform, Tibet had 197 hereditary noble families and 25 big noble families, with the biggest numbering seven to eight, each holding dozens of manors and tens of thousand of ke of land.
　　农奴超过旧西藏人口的90%，藏语叫“差巴”（即领种份地，向农奴主支差役的人）和“堆穷”（意为冒烟的小户）。他们不占有土地，没有人身自由，都依附在某一领主的庄园中为生。此外还有占人口5%的“朗生”，他们是世代家奴，没有任何生产资料，也没有丝毫人身自由。
Serfs made up 90 percent of old Tibet's population. They were called tralpa in Tibetan (namely people who tilled plots of land assigned to them and had to provide corvee labor for the serf-owners) and duiqoin (small households with chimneys emitting smoke). They had no land or personal freedom, and the survival of each of them depended on an estate-holder's manor. In addition, nangzan who comprised 5 percent of the population were hereditary household slaves, deprived of any means of production and personal freedom.
　　农奴主占有农奴的人身，把农奴当作自己的私有财产随意支配，可以买卖、转让、赠送、抵债和交换。据史料记载，1943年，大贵族车门·罗布旺杰把100名农奴卖给了止贡地区噶珠康萨的一名僧官，每个农奴的价钱是60两藏银（约合四块银元）；他还把400农奴送给功德林寺，抵了3000品藏银（约合一万银元）的债。农奴主掌握着农奴生、死、婚、嫁大权。不是同一农奴主的男女农奴结婚要缴纳“赎身费”，有的是采取男换男，女换女的交换，有的是婚嫁后，夫妻双方的领属关系不变，将来生男孩归夫方领主，生女孩归妻方领主。农奴的子女一出生，就登记入册，注定了终身为农奴的命运。
Serf-owners literally possessed the living bodies of their serfs. Since serfs were at their disposal as their private property, they could trade and transfer them, present them as gifts, make them mortgages for a debt and exchange them. According to historical records, in 1943 the aristocrat Chengmoim Norbu Wanggyai sold 100 serfs to a monk official at Garzhol Kamsa, in Zhigoin area, at the cost of 60 liang of Tibetan silver (about four silver dollars) per serf. He also sent 400 serfs to the Gundelin Monastery as mortgage for a debt of 3,000 pin Tibetan silver (about 10,000 silver dollars). Serf-owners had a firm grip on the birth, death and marriage of serfs. Male and female serfs not belonging to the same owner had to pay "redemption fees" before they could marry. In some cases, an exchange was made with a man swapped for man and a woman for woman. In other cases, after a couple wedded, the ownership of both husband and wife remained unchanged, but their sons would belong to the husband's owner and their daughters to the wife's owner. Children of serfs were registered the moment they were born, setting their life-long fate as serfs.
　　农奴主用差役和高利贷对农奴进行残酷的剥削。旧西藏的差税制度十分残酷，有载入注册籍的永久性差税，还有临时加派的差税。据不完全统计，仅噶厦（西藏地方政府）征收的差税种类就达200多种。农奴为噶厦和庄园主支的差，占农奴户劳动量的50%以上，高者可达70%至80%。据民主改革前调查，属于十四世达赖的摄政大扎的达隆绛庄园共有土地1445克，全劳力和半劳力农奴计81个，全年共支差21260天，折合劳动量为67.3人全年服劳役，即83%的农奴全年无偿地为农奴主支差服役。
Serf-owners ruthlessly exploited serfs through corvee and usury. The corvee tax system of old Tibet was very cruel. Permanent corvee tax was registered and there were also temporary additional corvee taxes. Incomplete statistics indicate the existence of more than 200 categories of corvee taxes levied by the Gaxag (Tibetan local government). The corvee assigned by Gaxag and manorial lords accounted for over 50 percent of the labor of serf households, and could go as high as 70-80 percent. According to a survey conducted before the Democratic Reform, the Darongqang Manor owned by Regent Dagzhag of the 14th Dalai Lama had a total of 1,445 ke of land, and 81 able-bodied and semi-able-bodied serfs. They were assigned a total of 21,260 corvee days for the whole year, the equivalent of an entire year's labor by 67.3 people. In effect, 83 percent of the serfs had to do corvee for one full year.
　　农奴成年累月地辛勤劳动，却连温饱也得不到保障，经常要靠借高利贷勉强糊口。高利贷年利率一般都很高，向寺庙借钱利率为30%，借粮为20%或25%；向贵族借钱利率为20%，借粮为20%或25%。
The serfs engaged in hard labor year in and year out and yet had no guaranteed food or clothing. Often they had to rely on money borrowed at usury to keep body and soul together. The annual interest rate for usurious loans was very high, while that for money borrowed from monasteries was 30 percent, and for grain 20 or 25 percent. Monetary loans from nobles exacted a 20 percent interest, while that for grain amounted to 20 or 25 percent.
　　噶厦设有几个放债机构，历代达赖喇嘛也有两个专管放债的机构。据1950年达赖的两个放债机构有关帐簿的不完全记载，共放高利贷藏银303.85万两。
Gaxag had several money-lending institutions, and the Dalai Lama of various generations had two organizations specialized in lending money. Incomplete records in the account books of the two cash-lending bodies of the Dalai Lama in 1950 show that they had lent out about 3.0385 million liang of Tibetan silver in usurious loans.
　　高利贷利滚利，造成永远还不完的“子孙债”和以借贷人和担保人全部破产而告终的“连保债”。墨竹工卡县有一名叫次仁贡布的农奴，他的祖父曾向色拉寺借了50克（一克合14公斤）粮食，祖父、父亲和他三代人还利息达77年，总共付利息粮3000多克，可领主说他仍欠粮10万克。东嘎宗有个叫丹增的农奴，1941年借了农奴主一克青稞，到1951年，农奴主要他还600克，他只好逃亡，妻子被逼死，七岁的儿子被抓去抵债。
Snowballing interest of usurious loans created debts which could never be repaid by even succeeding generations and debts involving a guarantor resulted in the bankruptcy of both the debtor and the guarantor. The grandfather of a serf named Cering Goinbo of Maizhokunggar County once borrowed 50 ke of grain (1 ke equal to 14 kg) from the Sera Monastery. In 77 years the three generations had paid more than 3,000 ke of grain for the interest but the serf-owner still claimed that Cering Goinbo owed him 100,000 ke of grain. There was another serf named Dainzin in Donggar County who in 1941 borrowed one ke of qingke barley from his master. In 1951 when he was asked to repay 600 ke, he was forced to flee, his wife was driven to death and his seven-year-old son was taken away to repay the debt by labor.
　　西藏地方统治者制定了一系列法律以维护农奴主的利益。旧西藏通行了几百年的《十三法典》和《十六法典》，将人分成三等九级，明确规定人们在法律上的地位不平等。法典规定：“勿与贤哲贵胄相争”，“下打上者、小官与大官争执者犯重罪，均应拘捕”，“不受主人约束者逮捕之”，“百姓碰撞官长者逮捕之”，“向王宫喊冤，不合体统，应逮捕鞭击之”等等。不同等级的人触犯同一刑律，其量刑标准和处置方法大不相同。杀人赔偿命价律中规定：“人有等级之分，因此命价也有高低”上等上级的人如王子、大活佛等，其命价为尸体等重的黄金；而下等下级的人如妇女、屠夫、猎户、匠人等，其命价为草绳一根。伤人赔偿律中规定：仆人使主人受伤的，应斫掉仆人的手或脚；主人打伤仆人，延医治疗即可，不给赔偿费。
In order to safeguard the interests of serf-owners, Tibetan local rulers formulated a series of laws. The 13-Article Code and 16-Article Code, which were enforced for several hundred years in old Tibet, divided people into three classes and nine ranks. They clearly stipulated that people were unequal in legal status. The codes stipulated, "It is forbidden to quarrel with a worthy, sage, noble and descendant of the ruler"; "persons of the lower rank who attack those of the upper rank, and a junior official who quarrels with a senior official commit a serious crime and so should be detained"; "anyone who resists a master's control should be arrested"; "a commoner who offends an official should be arrested"; "anyone who voices grievances at the palace, behaving disgracefully, should be arrested and whipped." The standards for measuring punishment and the methods for dealing with people of different classes and ranks who violated the same criminal law were quite different. In the law concerning the penalty for murder, it was written, "As people are divided into different classes and ranks, the value of a life correspondingly differs." The lives of people of the highest rank of the upper class, such as a prince or leading Living Buddha, are calculated in gold to the same weight as the dead body. The lives of people of the lowest rank of the lower class, such as women, butchers, hunters and craftsmen, are worth a straw rope. In the law concerning compensation for injury, it was stipulated that a servant who injures his master should have his hands or feet chopped off; a master who injures a servant is only responsible for the medical treatment for the wound, with no other compensation required.
　　农奴主运用成文法或习惯法，设立监狱或私牢。地方政府有法庭、监狱，大寺庙也设法庭、监狱，领主还可在自己的庄园私设监狱。刑罚极为野蛮残酷，如剜目、割耳、断手、剁脚、抽筋、投水等。在西藏最大的寺庙之一甘丹寺就有许多手铐、脚镣、棍棒和用来剜目、抽筋等的残酷刑具。在北京民族文化宫的“西藏社会历史资料展”中，有当年被农奴主砍下的农奴肢体等许多实物和照片。
Making use of written or common law, the serf-owners set up penitentiaries or private jails. Local governments had law courts and prisons, as had large monasteries. Estate-holders could build private prisons on their own manor ground. Punishments were extremely savage and cruel, and included gouging out the eyes; cutting off ears, hands and feet; pulling out tendons; and throwing people into water. In the Gandan Monastery, one of the largest in Tibet, there were many handcuffs, fetters, clubs and other cruel instruments of torture used for gouging out eyes and ripping out tendons. Many materials and photos showing limbs of serfs mutilated by serf-owners in those years are kept in the hall housing the Tibetan Social and Historical Relics Exhibition in the Beijing Cultural Palace of Nationalities.
　　在漫长的封建农奴制社会里，西藏广大农、牧奴政治上受压迫，经济上受剥削，动辄遭到迫害。农奴中流传着这样的话：“能带走的只是自己的身影，能留下的只有自己的脚印。”可以说，旧西藏是世界上侵犯人权最为严重的地区之一。
Under the centuries-long feudal serfdom, the Tibetan serfs were politically oppressed, economically exploited and frequently persecuted. A saying circulated among serfs, "All a serf can carry away is his own shadow, and all he can leave behind is his footprints." Old Tibet can be said to have been one of the world's regions witnessing the most serious violations of human rights.
　　面对封建农奴制度的残酷统治，西藏劳动人民从未停止过反抗斗争。他们采用请愿、逃亡、抗租抗差，直至武装斗争等形式争取自己的人身权利。但是，他们的要求遭到三大领主的残酷镇压。旧西藏法律规定：“民反者均犯重法”，不但本人处死，而且家产没收，妻子为奴。五世达赖曾经发过一道谕令：“拉日孜巴的百姓听我的命令……如果你们再企图找自由，找舒服，我已授权拉日孜巴对你们施行砍手、砍脚、挖眼、打、杀”。这道谕令多次被后来的当权者重申。
Despite the cruel rule of the feudal serfdom, Tibetan laboring people never ceased their resistance struggles. They strove for their personal rights by making petitions, fleeing, resisting rent and corvee and even waging armed struggle. However, they were subjected to ruthless suppression by the three big estate-holders. The law of old Tibet stated, "All civilians who rebel all commit felonies." In such incidences not only the rebel himself would be killed, but his family property would be confiscated and his wife be made a slave. The 5th Dalai Lama once issued the order, "Commoners of Lhari Ziba listen to my order: .... I have authorized Lhari Ziba to chop off your hands and feet, gouge out your eyes, and beat and kill you if you again attempt to look for freedom and comfort." This order was reiterated on many occasions by his successors in power.
人民获得了人身自由
 The People Gain Personal Freedom
　　1951年，中央人民政府和西藏地方政府签订了关于和平解放西藏办法的“十七条协议”，西藏获得和平解放，从而为西藏人民争取平等的人身权利带来了希望。1959年叛乱平息后，中央人民政府顺应西藏人民的愿望，在西藏进行了民主改革，废除了极端腐朽、黑暗的封建农奴制度，百万农奴和奴隶翻身解放，不再被作为农奴主的个人财产加以买卖、转让、交换、抵债，不再被农奴主强迫劳动，从此获得了人身自由的权利。这是西藏历史上划时代的伟大变革。
The central people's government and the local government of Tibet signed in 1951 the 17-Article Agreement on measures for the peaceful liberation of Tibet, and Tibet was peacefully liberated. This brought hope to the Tibetan people in their struggle for equal personal rights. After the quelling of the armed rebellion in 1959, the central people's government, in compliance with the wishes of the Tibetan people, conducted the Democratic Reform in Tibet and abolished the extremely decadent and dark feudal serfdom. The million serfs and slaves were emancipated. They were no longer regarded as the personal property of serf-owners who could use them for transactions, transfer, mortgage for a debt or exchange or exact their toil. From that time on they gained the right to personal freedom. This was a great, epoch-making change in Tibetan history.
　　旧西藏的法典被废除，人不再分为三等九级，各种野蛮刑罚被禁止，私设的监狱被全部拆除。新中国宪法和法律，保障了西藏人民人人享有生命与人身安全的权利。
Now old Tibet's codes have been abrogated. Citizens are no longer divided into three classes and nine ranks. All sorts of barbarous punishments are prohibited and privately established prisons have all been dismantled. New China's Constitution and laws guarantee that every Tibetan enjoys the right to subsistence and personal safety.
　　民主改革废除了生产资料的农奴主所有制，参加叛乱的农奴主占有的耕地无偿分给了无地的农奴和奴隶。山南乃东县凯松溪卡的443位农民分得了1696克土地。当旧的地契、债约被扔进火堆时，昔日的农奴们围着火堆跳起舞蹈。75岁的索朗说：“过去种主人的地，白天黑夜都成了人家的人，半夜叫支差不敢等到天明，现在分地给我，真觉得睡觉香、吃饭甜，真想多活几年，看看今后的好日子。”对未参加叛乱的农奴的土地和其他生产资料实行赎买政策，1300多户未参加叛乱的农奴主和代理人的90万克土地和82万多头牲畜由国家支付赎买金4500多万元。
The Democratic Reform abolished the ownership of the means of production by serf-owners. The farmland originally occupied by those serf-owners involved in the armed rebellion was distributed free to landless serfs and slaves. In Kesong Manor, Nedong County in Shannan Prefecture, 443 peasants were given 1,696 ke of land. When the title deeds for land and debt contracts were thrown into the fire, the former serfs danced around the blaze. The 75-year-old Soinam said, "I used to till the land of my master, and I belonged to him day and night. When asked to do corvee at midnight, I dared not wait till dawn the next day. Now I have received land. I feel I can sleep well and have a good appetite. I really want to live several years longer so that I can see the happy future." A policy of redemption was introduced with regard to the land and other means of production of serf-owners who did not participate in the rebellion. The 900,000 ke of land and over 820,000 head of livestock of the 1,300 serf-owners and their agents, who did not participate in the rebellion, were redeemed by the state at a cost topping 45 million yuan.
　　西藏劳动人民再不受农奴主的沉重差税和高利贷剥削，劳动果实全部留归自己，生产积极性空前高涨。全区粮食产量1960年即比1959年增长了12.6%，牲畜存栏数增长了10%。西藏人民开始得到争取温饱的生存权利。
The Tibetan laboring people no longer suffer from the heavy corvee taxes and usurious exploitation by the serf-owners. The fruits of their labor all belong to themselves, and the enthusiasm of the Tibetan people for production became unprecedentedly high. The region's grain output in 1960 increased by 12.6 percent over 1959 and the number of livestock by 10 percent. The Tibetan people began to enjoy the right to subsistence, along with adequate food and clothing.
人民享有的政治权利
 The People Enjoy Political Rights
　　在旧西藏“政教合一”的封建领主专政的政治制度下，达赖喇嘛作为藏传佛教格鲁派的首领之一，兼任地方政府的首脑，集政教大权于一身。原西藏地方政府的官制是僧俗双轨制，行政机构中既有俗官，也有僧官，僧官大于俗官，某些机构只有僧官而不设俗官。寺院在处理政治事务方面，享有特殊的权力。在召开商讨重大事务的“官员扩大会议”时，要有三大寺（即甘丹寺、色拉寺、哲蚌寺）和四大林（即功德林、丹吉林、策墨林、次觉林等四座大寺庙）的住持参加。形成决议后，需要地方政府和三大寺共同加盖印章方能生效。
Under the political system combining religion with politics and despotic rule by feudal estate-holders in old Tibet, the Dalai Lama was one of the leaders of the Gelug Sect of Tibetan Buddhism and also head of the Tibetan local government. He held both political and religious power. The official system of the former Tibetan local government was a dual one of monk and lay officials. In the administrative organs, there were both monk and lay officials, with the former higher than the latter in rank. But there were monk officials in some organizations. Monasteries enjoyed special jurisdiction in handling political affairs. Abbots of the three major monasteries (Gandan, Sera and Zhaibung) and the four large ones (Gundeling, Dangyailing, Cemoinling and Cejoiling) participated in all "enlarged meetings of officials" to discuss important events. Resolutions adopted at the meetings became effective only when they bore the stamps of the local government and the three major monasteries.
　　民主改革结束了“政教合一”的政治制度，实行人民民主的政治制度。按照新中国宪法，西藏人民同全国各族人民一样，成为国家的主人，享有法律所规定的一切政治权利。
The Democratic Reform in 1959 put an end to the political system of combining religious with political rule and introduced the new political system of people's democracy. Under the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, the Tibetan people, like the people of various nationalities throughout the country, have become masters of the country and enjoy full political rights provided for by the law.
　　西藏自治区年满十八周岁的公民，不分民族、种族、性别、职业、家庭出身、宗教信仰、教育程度、财产状况和居住期限，都有选举权和被选举权。他们直接选举县、区、乡、镇人民代表大会的代表，这些代表又选举出席全国和自治区、市人民代表大会的代表。通过各级人民代表大会，人民行使管理国家和地方事务的权利。西藏人民为获得当家作主人的权利而政治热情高涨，积极地行使自己的权利。1988年西藏自治区第五届人民代表大会代表选举时，据拉萨、那曲、日喀则、林芝、山南五个地市统计，参选率达93.88%。为了使不识字的群众也能参加选举，不少地方群众用豆子代替选票，他们同意谁，就在那位候选人背后的碗中投进一颗豆子，谁得的豆子多，谁就当选。目前，以藏族为主的当地民族代表，在全区县人大代表总数占95%以上，在自治区人大代表中占82%以上。全自治区75个县（市、区）的现任人民代表大会常务委员会主任绝大多数是昔日的农奴或奴隶。
Citizens of the Tibet Autonomous Region who have reached the age of 18 have the right to vote and to stand for election, regardless of their ethnic status, race, sex, occupation, family background, religious belief, education, property status, or length of residence. They can directly vote for deputies to the people's congresses of counties, districts, townships and towns. These deputies can in turn elect deputies to the national, autonomous regional and municipal people's congresses. The people exercise the power of managing the state and local affairs through the people's congresses at all levels. The political enthusiasm of the Tibetan people is high because they have obtained the right to be masters of their own affairs. They have actively exercised their rights. Statistics of Lhasa, Nagqu, Xigaze, Nyingchi and Shannan on the elections for deputies to the Fifth People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region in 1988 show that 93.88 percent of the people there voted. To enable illiterates to participate, beans were used in place of ballots in many places. Voters placed beans in the bowls behind the back of the candidates of their choice. Those with the most beans went into office. Currently, deputies of the local ethnic minorities, with Tibetans as the main force, account for over 95 percent of the total local deputies to the people's congresses at the district and county levels and the figure is over 82 percent for those to the People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region. Most of the current chairmen of the Standing Committees of the people's congresses of the 75 counties (cities and districts) in the autonomous region used to be serfs or slaves in old Tibet.
　　为了保证西藏各阶层、各界人士都能在社会政治生活中充分表达意见和发挥作用，1959年西藏即成立了“中国人民政治协商会议西藏委员会”。人民政协是中国共产党领导下的最广泛的爱国统一战线组织，是进行政治协商，实行互相监督，发扬社会主义民主的重要政治组织。政协的这种特点在西藏得到了充分的体现，西藏政协广泛吸收了藏族和其他民族各界人士参加。在这些人士当中，有不少是原西藏地方政府的爱国僧俗官员和宗教界上层人士，如昌都地区大活佛、现任全国政协副主席、西藏自治区人大常委会副主任帕巴拉·格列朗杰，原西藏大贵族、地方政府噶伦、现西藏政协副主席拉鲁·次旺多杰等。这些人士通过政治协商会议参政议政，帮助政府进行决策。在历届政协会议中，他们的提案涉及到民族，宗教、文教、科技、卫生、农业、牧业、林业、城乡建设、环境保护等各个方面，对于维护祖国统一，加强民族团结，反对民族分裂，继承和发展民族传统文化，加速发展西藏地方经济，推进改革开放等项工作，发挥了重要作用。
The Tibetan Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) was set up in Tibet in 1959 to ensure that people of all social strata and of all walks of life can fully voice their opinions and play their roles in social and political life. The CPPCC, an organization of the broadest patriotic united front under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, is an important political organization conducting political consultation, implementing mutual supervision and developing socialist democracy. Its role has been brought into full play in Tibet. The CPPCC Tibetan Committee has drawn on the participation of the people of all social strata from Tibetan and other ethnic groups. Many of them were patriotic monk and secular officials of the former local government of Tibet and upper-class religious figures. They include Pagbalha Geleg Namgyai, the Great Living Buddha of Qamdo Prefecture, who is now vice-chairman of the CPPCC National Committee and vice-chairman of the Standing Committee of the People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region; and Lhalu Cewang Doje, a former Tibetan noble man and a Galoin of the Tibetan local government, who is currently vice-chairman of the CPPCC Tibetan Committee. Through the political consultative conferences, these people have participated in the discussion and management of state affairs and helped the government in making decisions. Their motions raised at past conferences have involved ethnic groups, religion, culture and education, science and technology, public health, agriculture, animal husbandry, forestry, urban and rural construction and environmental protection. They have played an important role in safeguarding the unification of the motherland, strengthening national unity, opposing national separation, inheriting and developing traditional national culture, speeding up development of Tibetan economy, and promoting reform and opening up.
　　根据中国宪法，西藏实行民族区域自治。早在1955年3月，中央政府就作出了成立西藏自治区筹备委员会的决定。1965年9月，在拉萨召开了西藏自治区第一届人民代表大会第一次会议，西藏自治区宣告正式成立。参加大会的藏族代表绝大多数是翻身农奴和奴隶，也有上层爱国人士和宗教界人士。会议选举阿沛·阿旺晋美为西藏自治区人民委员会主席。广大农奴和奴隶砸碎了封建农奴制的枷锁后，获得了政治平等权利和民族平等权利。
Tibet practices regional national autonomy in accordance with the Constitution of the People's Republic of China. In March 1955, the central government decided to set up the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. In September 1965, the First Session of the First People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region was held in Lhasa and the establishment of the Tibet Autonomous Region was officially announced. Most deputies of the Tibetan nationality to the congress were emancipated serfs and slaves, as well as patriots from the upper strata and religious figures. At the congress, Ngapoi Nagwang Jigme was elected chairman of the People's Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region. Having smashed the yoke of the feudal serfdom, the broad masses of serfs and slaves obtained political and national equal rights.
　　《中华人民共和国民族区域自治法》规定：“民族自治地方的人民代表大会有权依照当地民族的政治、经济和文化的特点，制定自治条例和单行条例。”西藏自治区人民代表大会根据民族区域自治法所赋予的权利，从1965年至今，已经制定60余项符合西藏实际情况、维护西藏人民利益的地方性法规、条例、决定和决议，内容涉及政治、经济、文化、教育等各个方面。例如：《西藏自治区人民代表大会议事规则》、《西藏自治区地方性法规制定程序》、《西藏自治区集体矿山企业和个体采矿管理办法》、《西藏自治区学习、使用和发展藏语文的若干规定（试行）》、《西藏自治区文物保护管理条例》、《关于实行〈中华人民共和国婚姻法〉的变通条例》等。这些地方性法规的制定和实施，为西藏人民各项民主权利的实现和地方社会经济文化事业的发展，提供了重要的法律保障。
The Law of the People's Republic of China Governing Regional National Autonomy stipulates, "People's congresses in the areas of national autonomy have the right to formulate regulations on the exercise of autonomy or specific regulations in accordance with the political, economic and cultural characteristics of the local nationalities." In accordance with the rights bestowed by the Law Governing Regional National Autonomy, the People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region has since 1965 formulated more than 60 local rules and regulations, decrees, decisions and resolutions, involving political, economic, cultural and educational aspects, which conform to the reality of Tibet and maintain the interests of Tibetan people. They include the Rules of Procedures of the People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region, the Procedures on Formulating Local Laws and Regulations for the Tibet Autonomous Region, the Measures for the Management of Mining by Collective Mining Enterprises and Individuals in the Tibet Autonomous Region, the Resolutions on Study, Use and Development of the Tibetan Language in the Tibet Autonomous Region, the Regulations of the Tibet Autonomous Region on the Protection and Management of Cultural Relics, and the Accommodation Rules for the Implementation of the Marriage Law of the People's Republic of China. The formulation and implementation of these local rules and regulations have furnished an important legal guarantee to the realization of democratic rights for the Tibetan people and to the development of local social, economic and cultural undertakings.
　　为了使西藏人民更好地行使管理国家和地方事务的权利。政府十分重视培养西藏民族干部。目前，西藏自治区共有藏族干部3.7万人，各级人大、政府、政协的主要领导职务都由藏族干部担任。藏族干部占干部总数的66.6%，在自治区一级干部中占71.7%，在县级干部中占74.8%。在旧西藏处于社会最底层的藏族妇女，也已走上领导岗位，1986年妇女干部已占全区干部总数的30%以上，现有5人任自治区一级干部，38人任专区一级干部，232人任县级干部。西藏的干部队伍主体是翻身农奴和奴隶，同时也包括各界爱国上层人士。即使对于参加过叛乱的农奴主和他们的代理人，只要放弃反动立场，确有所长也给予适当安排，使他们有机会为国家、为人民出力。
To enable the Tibetan people to better perform the right to manage state and local affairs, the central government has attached great weight to the training of cadres of Tibetan nationality. Currently, there are 37,000 cadres of Tibetan nationality in the Tibet Autonomous Region. All the main leading posts in the people's congresses, governments and people's political consultative conferences at various levels are filled by Tibetans. Cadres of Tibetan nationality account for 66.6 percent of the total in Tibet, 71.7 percent at the regional level and 74.8 percent at the county level. Tibetan women were in the lowest echelon of society in old Tibet. Today, many of them hold leading posts, accounting for upwards of 30 percent of the cadres in the autonomous region in 1986. At present, five have become cadres at the regional level, 38 at the prefectural level and 232 at the county level. Most Tibetan cadres are emancipated serfs and slaves. There are also some patriots from the upper class. Appropriate arrangements have also been made even for those serf-owners and their agents who participated in the rebellion, giving them the chance to contribute to the state and people if they renounce their reactionary stand and possess real skills.
　　在司法活动中，西藏人民除了享有与中国其他地区的人民同等的法定权利外，还享有民族区域自治法所规定的特殊权利。西藏自治区人民代表大会规定：“各级人民法院与检察院必须保障藏族公民用本民族语言文字进行诉讼的权利。对藏族诉讼参与人，要使用藏语文检察和审理案件，法律文书要使用藏文。”现在，西藏的各级检察院、法院的主要官员均由藏族公民担任。
In judicial activities, in addition to enjoying equal legal rights with the people in other parts of the country, the Tibetan people have also been granted special rights stipulated in the Law of the People's Republic of China Governing Regional National Autonomy. The People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region stipulates, "People's courts and procuratorates at various levels must guarantee the right of Tibetan citizens to use their own national language to enter a lawsuit. In cases involving the Tibetans, Tibetan language should be used in doing procuratorial work and hearing cases, and legal documents should be written in the Tibetan language." At present, the main officials of the procuratorates and courts at all levels in Tibet are Tibetan citizens.
经济的发展和人民生活的改善
 Economic Development and Improvement of Living Standards
　　旧西藏的封建农奴制度，严重束缚了社会生产力的发展，使西藏经济长期处于极其落后的状态。农业生产基本上是使用“二牛抬杠”的木犁耕地，牦牛踩场脱粒。在少数地方，还保持着“刀耕火种”、“烧荒肥田”的原始耕作方式。1952年，西藏亩产粮食平均只有80公斤（15亩为一公顷），人均占有粮食125公斤。牧业基本上是靠天养畜，自然灾害经常造成牲畜大批死亡，1952年全区牲畜总头数仅为974万头（只）。旧西藏的民族手工业也十分落后，现代工业更是一片空白。旧西藏交通险阻，行路艰辛，贷物运输、邮件传递全靠人背畜驮。横贯西藏的雅鲁藏布江上，只有明朝时残留下来的几条铁索桥，没有一座能通车的桥梁。英国人送给达赖喇嘛的汽车，由于没有公路，只能将汽车拆了用牲畜驮到拉萨。能源状况落后，至1950年解放前夕，仅有一座125千瓦的水电站断续供电。经济的落后和农奴主的残酷剥削，使人民群众处于极端贫穷和悲惨的生活境地。仅就首府拉萨来说，民主改革前城区只有两万多人，城周围住在破烂帐篷里的贫民和乞丐就近千户。监狱不供犯人伙食，戴着手铐、木枷的“囚犯”沿街乞讨。无家可归者冻饿倒毙街头的凄惨情景处处可见。
The feudal serfdom in old Tibet seriously handicapped the development of the social productive forces. The economy in Tibet was in a state of extreme backwardness for a long time. Wooden ploughs were the basic tools for agricultural production and yaks were employed for threshing. Slash and burn cultivation and the burning of grass to fertilize land were still customs retained in a few localities. In 1952, each mu of land (15 mu equal to 1 hectare) could only produce 80 kg of grain on the average and the per-capita share of grain came to 125 kg. Livestock breeding hinged on climatic conditions and frequent natural calamities often caused the deaths of large numbers of animals. In 1952, the region had only 9.74 million head of livestock. The handicrafts industry was also extremely backward and modern industry was nonexistent in old Tibet. Dangerous and difficult roads made it hard to travel in the region. The transport of goods and the delivery of mail had to depend on human and animal power. There were no bridges on the Yarlung Zangbo River that dissects Tibet, except for a few chain constructions left over from the Ming Dynasty. Since there were no highways in Tibet, the car given to the Dalai Lama by the British had to be dismantled and carried to Lhasa by draught animals. Tibet was also backward in regard to sources of energy. In 1950, on the eve of Tibet's peaceful liberation, there was only one 125-kw hydropower station in the region, which supplied electricity only intermittently. The backward economy and the cruel exploitation by the serf-owners kept the people in dire poverty and misery. As far as Lhasa, the capital of Tibet, was concerned, there were only 20,000 residents in the city proper before the Democratic Reform in 1959, and close to 1,000 tattered tents thrown together for the poor and beggars could be seen on the outskirts of the city. Prison authorities offered no food to the convicts, and "prisoners" in handcuffs and wooden cangues begged in the streets. And the pathetic remains of those homeless people who died of frost and hunger could be spotted anywhere in the city.
　　民主改革大大激发了广大农牧民的生产积极性。四十年来，特别是改革开放十多年来，西藏人民在中央政府和全国人民的支持下，发展生产，治穷致富，使整个社会发生了翻天覆地的变化。
The Democratic Reform has greatly fired the enthusiasm of farmers and herdsmen for production. In the past four decades, particularly since the reform and opening up of the last ten years and more, earth-shaking changes have taken place in Tibet. With the support of the central government and people throughout the country, the Tibetan people have developed production, alleviated poverty and built up family fortunes.
　　发展农牧业在西藏的经济生活中处于最重要的地位。民主改革初期，中央和西藏地方人民政府即制定了符合当地实际的一系列发展农牧业的方针和政策，并从财力、物力等方面给予大力扶持，使农牧业生产水平明显提高。1966年，粮食总产量就由1959年的1.8亿公斤增加到3.15亿公斤，平均每年增长8.3%；牧畜从1959年的955.6万头（只）发展到1817.5万头（只），增长90.2%，人民生活得到了初步改善。
The development of agriculture and animal husbandry has been given top priority in the Tibetan economy. During the early stage of the Democratic Reform, the central government and the Tibetan local government formulated a series of policies and principles for the development of agriculture and animal husbandry which were compatible with the local conditions. Financial and material support was also provided. As a result, Tibet's production levels of agriculture and animal husbandry increased greatly. Total grain output rose from 180 million kg in 1959 to 315 million kg in 1966, registering an average growth rate of 8.3 percent a year. Cattle soared from 9.556 million head in 1959 to 18.175 million head, a rise of 90.2 percent. The living standards of the people took the first step towards improvement.
　　1980年开始，政府对农牧民实行免征免购，不收任何农牧业税。1984年，除对农牧业继续提供免息贷款外，对1980年以前用于兴修水利、购买农牧业机械等项集体贷款免于归还。农牧区实行了以家庭经营为主的各种形式的生产责任制，发展家庭副业，恢复集市贸易，并开展了大规模的农田、草场基本建设。西藏解放前没有农业机械和化肥，现在拖拉机已成为农户自买的农具。科学种田、科学养畜受到普遍重视和欢迎。生产工具的进步和科学技术的应用使生产得到全面的发展。1991年，西藏农业总产值达到20.46亿元，比1952年增长3.4倍，粮食产量达到5.8亿公斤，平均亩产达到224公斤，分别比1952年增长2.7倍和1.8倍。尽管西藏人口1991年比1952年增长一倍多，但1991年人均占有粮食达到290.5公斤，仍比1952年提高1.2倍。畜产品产量大幅度增长，1991年肉类总产量达到9.1万吨，奶类总产量17.7万吨。
Since 1980, the government has imposed no levies on farmers and herdsmen, with both agricultural and livestock taxes exempted. In 1984, in addition to continuing the practice of interest exemption for agricultural and livestock loans, the government annulled repayment of pre-1980 collective loans used for the building of water conservancy projects and purchasing machinery for agriculture and animal husbandry. Agricultural and pastoral areas have introduced various forms of contracted production responsibility systems on a household basis, developed household sideline occupations, restored open markets and conducted large-scale capital construction of farmland and grassland. Before the liberation of Tibet, there was no farm machinery or chemical fertilizer in Tibet. Nowadays, farming households own tractors. Scientific farming and breeding of cattle has become highly valued and welcomed. Introduction of modern tools for production and the application of science and technology have boosted overall production. In 1991, the total output value of agriculture reached 2.046 billion yuan in Tibet, 4.4 times higher than in 1952. Grain output came to 580 million kg and the average per-mu yield was 224 kg, showing rises of 3.7 times and 2.8 times respectively over 1952. Although the 1991 population of Tibet was almost double that in 1952, the per-capita share of grain in 1991 came to 290.5 kg, or an increase of 2.2 times that of 1952. The output of animal by-products rose by a substantial margin. In 1991, the total meat output stood at 91,000 tons and the total output of milk reached 177,000 tons.
　　西藏现代工业是从民主改革后才起步的。1965年，西藏已建立了建筑、电力、汽车修理、森工、制革、硼砂、煤炭等工业企业80个，职工近万人，当年的工业总产值达2883万元。政府重视民族手工业的发展，1965年全区民族手工业发展到33个行业，年总产值由民主改革前的124万元增加到890万元，增长6.2倍。西藏缺油少煤，过去能源供应贫乏。为改变这种状况，1956年在拉萨修建了电站，这是西藏第一个公用电力企业。西藏地热资源丰富，由国家投资在羊八井建成了中国最大兆瓦级地热电站。到1991年，西藏电力装机容量已达14万千瓦，年发电量4亿千瓦小时。经过四十年的建设，西藏目前拥有电力、采矿、建材、森工、毛纺、印刷、食品等十多项现代工业，国营企业职工5.1万人。1991年，工业总产值为4.03亿元，比1959年增长4.3倍；民族手工业产值达到4600万元。
Modern industry started after the Democratic Reform of Tibet. In 1965, 80 industrial enterprises were established in Tibet. Employing close to 10,000 workers, they covered the building, power, motor vehicle repair, lumber, tanning, borax and coal industries. The total industrial output value reached 28.83 million yuan that year. The government has paid close attention to the development of the national handicrafts. In 1965, it had widened to encompass 33 trades and its total annual output value rose from 1.24 million yuan before the Democratic Reform to 8.9 million yuan, showing a 7.2-fold rise. Tibet was short of petroleum and coal, and energy supply was inadequate in the past. To change the situation, a power station was built in Lhasa in 1956. It was the first public power enterprise in Tibet. Tibet is rich in geothermal resources and the state invested in building a geothermal power station in Yangbajain with the biggest generating capacity in China. In 1991, the installed power generating capacity of Tibet reached 140,000 kw and the annual output of generated electricity came to 400 million kwh. After 40 years of construction, Tibet boasts a dozen or so modern industries such as power, mining, building materials, lumber, wool textile, printing and food. Employees of state-owned enterprises total 51,000. In 1991, the total industrial output value came to 403 million yuan, a rise of 5.3 times that of 1959. The output value of the handicrafts stood at 46 million yuan.
　　过去西藏没有一条正规公路。西藏和平解放后的第一项大规模建设，就是在平均海拔为3000米的崇山峻岭中修建四川和青海通往拉萨的公路。川藏公路全线长2413公里，青藏公路全线长2122公里。此后，又相继建成新藏、滇藏、中尼等干线公路。目前，全西藏有干线公路15条，支线公路315条，建成公路总长21842公里。除在深山之中的墨脱县外，所有的县77%的乡都通了公路。一个以拉萨为中心，以青藏、川藏、滇藏、中尼公路为骨架的公路网络已经形成。为了解决西藏的燃料供应困难，国家拨款修建了一条从青海省格尔木至西藏拉萨的成品油输油管道，全长1080公里，对保证西藏能源供应、支援经济建设起到重要作用。为了更好的适应西藏对外开放的需要，在1956年开辟拉萨至北京航线后，又相继开通了拉萨至成都、西安、兰州、上海、广州等国内航线和拉萨至尼泊尔加德满都的国际航线。
Tibet had no regular highways in the past. After the peaceful liberation of Tibet, the first large-scale construction project was to build highways from Sichuan and Qinghai to Lhasa on the high mountain ridges with an average elevation of 3,000 meters. The Sichuan-Tibet Highway is 2,413 km long and the Qinghai-Tibet Highway 2,122 km long. Since then, the Xinjiang-Tibet, Yunnan-Tibet and China-Nepal highways have been built one after another. Currently, there are 15 arterial highways and 315 feeder roads, with a total length of 21,842 km, throughout Tibet. Except for Medog County which is located deep in the mountains, highways provide access to all the counties and 77 percent of the townships in Tibet. A highway network, with Lhasa at the center, consisting mainly of the Qinghai-Tibet, Sichuan-Tibet, Yunnan-Tibet and China-Nepal highways, has taken shape. In order to solve Tibet's fuel supply problem, the state allocated funds to build a refined oil transmission pipeline from Golmud in Qinghai Province to Lhasa. This 1,080-km-long pipeline has played an important role in guaranteeing energy supplies for Tibet in its economic construction. To meet Tibet's need to open to the outside world, since the start of an air route from Lhasa to Beijing in 1956, domestic airlines have offered services from Lhasa to Chengdu, Xian, Lanzhou, Shanghai and Guangzhou. International air links have been inaugurated between Lhasa and Kathmandu, Nepal.
　　旧西藏现代科技事业完全是空白。民主改革后，先后建立了农业、畜牧业、交通、电力、建筑、地质、水利、气象、卫生、藏医药、教育等专门科研机构，培养了一批藏族科技人员。1985年成立了西藏自治区社会科学院。现在，西藏有专门科研机构17个，各类科技专业人员2.69万人。四十年来，西藏有347项科技成果获自治区级奖，其中“西藏太阳能资源的综合开发利用”等21项科研成果获国家级奖。
Modern science and technology did not exist in old Tibet. The period since the Democratic Reform has seen the establishment of agricultural, animal husbandry, communications, power, construction, geological, water conservancy, meteorological, public health, pharmaceutical and educational research institutions in Tibet. They have trained Tibetan scientific and technical personnel. The Academy of Social Sciences of the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up in 1985. Currently, Tibet has 17 special scientific research institutions with 26,900 technical personnel. Over the past 40 years, 347 scientific and technological achievements have been awarded prizes at the autonomous regional level. Of these, 21 scientific research achievements such as "the comprehensive development and utilization of solar energy resources in Tibet" have been honored by state prizes.
　　西藏高原雪峰和名寺古迹吸引着世界众多的探险客和旅游者。在对外开放中，西藏的旅游业开始逐步发展起来。现在，西藏已有旅行社11家，旅游涉外饭店、宾馆19家，床位3600张，开辟景区60多个。从1980年至1991年，共接待海外旅游者15.09万次。
The snowy peaks, famous monasteries and relics of historical interest on the Tibetan Plateau have attracted many adventurers and tourists from other countries. In opening up, Tibet's tourism industry has gradually flourished. At present, Tibet has 11 travel agencies and 19 tourist hotels and guesthouses with 3,600 beds for foreign guests. The autonomous region has opened over 60 scenic spots to the public. Between 1980 and 1991, Tibet received 150,900 overseas tourists.
　　经过四十多年的努力，西藏人民的生活水平普遍有了显著提高，绝大部分农牧民的温饱问题已基本解决，一部分农牧民已经富裕起来，1991年全区农牧民人均纯收入为455元，扣除物价上涨因素，比1979年的159元增长1.6倍。喜马拉雅山下的亚东县珠居村，1986年全村75户年收入36.16万元，全村有74户盖了新房。城镇居民家庭年人均收入为2120元，比1981年增长2.3倍。1991年末，城镇储蓄存款余额为49240万元，比1959年增长500多倍。农牧民家庭已拥有数量可观的生产资料，平均每户拥有生产性固定资产价值6021元，牲畜75头（只）；每百户拥有汽车9台，大小拖拉机6台，机动脱粒机3台，马车12台。农牧民人均实物消费量比解放前有大幅度的增长。1991年，人均消费粮食183.6公斤，食用油3.6公斤，肉类14.7公斤，奶类50公斤。在保持传统饮食习惯的同时，饮食结构向多样化发展，增加了蔬菜、禽蛋、酒类、糖果、糕点等的消费。人民住房有了很大改善。据旧西藏地方政府统计，1950年西藏有人口100万，其中没有自己住房的就有90余万人。现在，除了部分牧区的游牧民之外，所有的家庭都有固定住房。1991年城镇居民人均住房面积达到13.7平方米。西藏日喀则地区江孜县有5.67万人口，80%以上的群众住进了新房，人均住房面积达40平方米。藏族人民传统的生活方式注入了现代化的内容。据抽样调查统计，城镇每百户居民有自行车212辆，彩色电视机88台，收录机84台，洗衣机42台，电冰箱24台，照像机26架。各项文化设施的建设，使西藏人民的精神、文化生活也越来越丰富充实。
Due to efforts made in the past 40-odd years the living standards of the Tibetan people have improved markedly. Most farmers and herdsmen have adequate food and clothing and some have attained relative affluence. In 1991, the average net income of farmers and herdsmen in the region was 455 yuan. Allowing for price increases, the figure was 2.6 times higher than the 159 yuan of 1979. In the Zholgyur Village, Yadong County at the foot of the Himalayas, the annual income of the 75 households was 361,600 yuan in 1986 and 74 households have built new dwellings. The per-capita income of residents in cities and towns is 2,120 yuan a year, 3.3 times higher than in 1981. By the end of 1991, savings deposits of city and township residents totalled 492.4 million yuan, over 500 times more than in 1959. Farmers and herdsmen have obtained considerable amount of means of production. Each household owns 6,021 yuan worth of fixed assets for production purposes and 75 head of cattle. For every 100 households, there are nine motor vehicles, six tractors, three power-driven threshers, and 12 horse-drawn carts. The average per-capita material consumption of farmers and herdsmen has increased enormously compared with the period before the liberation of Tibet. In 1991, the per-capita consumption of grain was 183.6 kg. Other figures were 3.6 kg for edible oil, 14.7 kg for meat and 50 kg for milk. While retaining their traditional diet, Tibetans have expanded it to also include more vegetables, eggs, wine, sweets and pastries. The living conditions of the people have improved markedly. According to statistics produced by the local government of old Tibet, of a population of 1 million in Tibet in 1950, some 900,000 lacked real housing. Currently, except for the pastoral areas, all households have fixed housing. In 1991, the per-capita floor space of city and township residents reached 13.7 square meters. In Gyangze County of Xigaze Prefecture, which has a population of 56,700, over 80 percent have moved into new dwellings, with a per-capita floor space of 40 square meters. The traditional way of life of the Tibetan people has been somewhat modernized. A sample survey shows that for every 100 urban households, there are 212 bicycles, 88 color televisions, 84 radio cassette recorders, 42 washing machines, 24 refrigerators and 26 cameras. The construction of various cultural facilities has increasingly enriched the ethical outlook and cultural life of Tibetan people.
　　由于西藏地区特别困难的自然条件和历史上特别落后的社会发展状况，今天西藏的经济发展水平和人民生活水平仍低于中国全国的平均水平。1989年西藏自治区政府制定了《西藏经济社会发展战略设想》，实行对内对外开放，开拓区内、国内、国外市场，开发优势资源，发展重点区域和重点产业，力争尽快缩短西藏地区与中国其他地区的经济发展差距，为藏族和其他民族的共同繁荣打好基础。
Due to Tibet's extremely harsh natural conditions and its extremely backward social development in history, the level of economic development and the living standards of the people are still lower than the nation's average. In 1989, the government of Tibet Autonomous Region formulated the Strategic Ideas for the Economic and Social Development of Tibet. It has implemented the policy of opening up to the rest part of China and the outside world as well; exploring the regional, domestic and foreign markets; developing advantageous resources and stepping up development of key areas and key industries. The goal is to narrow as soon as possible the gap in economic development between Tibet and other areas of the nation in order to lay a solid foundation for the common prosperity of Tibetan and other ethnic groups.
宗教信仰自由
 Freedom of Religious Belief
　　西藏大多数人信奉藏传佛教。全区信奉伊斯兰教的只有约2000人，信奉天主教的近600人。
The majority of Tibetans believe in Tibetan Buddhism. There are also about 2,000 Muslims and 600 Catholics in the autonomous region.
　　尊重和保护宗教信仰自由，是中国政府的基本政策。西藏和平解放后，西藏各级机构认真贯彻宗教信仰自由政策，受到广大僧俗群众的赞扬。现在，西藏人民在国家宪法和法律的保护下，享有开展正常宗教活动的充分自由。信教者家中几乎都设有小经堂或佛龛。每年到拉萨朝佛敬香的信教群众均达百万人次以上。在西藏处处可以看到善男信女悬挂的经幡，堆积的嘛尼堆。在大昭寺等一些著名的寺院内外，挤满了磕长头、转经、朝佛的信教群众。
Respect for and protection of freedom of religious belief is a basic policy of the Chinese government. After the peaceful liberation of Tibet, organizations at all levels in Tibet earnestly carried out the policy, gaining the appreciation of both monks and lay people. Protected by the Constitution of the People's Republic of China and state laws, the Tibetan people now enjoy full freedom to participate in normal religious activities. Almost every religious family has a small sutra recitation hall or a niche for a Buddhist statue. More than 1 million worshipers make the pilgrimage to Lhasa each year. Sutra streamers and Mani stone mounds put up by devout believers can be seen everywhere in Tibet. Inside and outside famous monasteries such as the Jokhang are crowds of worshipers either prostrating in prayer, turning their prayer wheels or bowing to Buddhist statues.
　　在“文化大革命”期间，西藏同全国其他地区一样，宗教信仰自由政策遭到了严重破坏，宗教活动场所及设施受到了严重损失。“文化大革命”结束以后，西藏重新全面地落实宗教信仰自由政策。1980年以来，西藏平反了冤假错案，相继恢复和新成立了宗教工作机构，在保障公民的宗教信仰自由权利方面做了大量工作。十多年来中国政府向西藏地方拨专款两亿多元用于落实宗教政策，维修了建于公元七世纪的大昭寺，公元八世纪吐蕃王兴建的桑耶寺，藏传佛教格鲁派四大名寺哲蚌寺、色拉寺、甘丹寺和扎什伦布寺。为了维修布达拉宫，国家一次就拨款4000多万元。1984年，中央资助专款670万元，黄金111公斤，白银2000公斤及大量珠宝，在十世班禅大师主持下，修复了五至九世班禅灵塔、祀殿。至今，西藏得到修复和开放的宗教活动场所已达到1400多处，满足了信教群众正常宗教生活的需要，政府还多方设法寻回在“文化大革命”中散失的佛像、法器等宗教用品，分发给各寺庙，受到广大僧人和群众的欢迎。
During the period of the "cultural revolution" (1966-76), however, in Tibet as in other parts of China, the policy on freedom of religious belief was disrupted, and sites and facilities for religious activities were seriously damaged. After the "cultural revolution" ended, the policy on freedom of religious belief began to be implemented again in Tibet in an all-round way. Since 1980, unjust, false and wrong cases have been redressed in Tibet and religious institutions have been reinstated or established, and a great deal of work has been done to ensure freedom of religious belief for all citizens. Over the past decade and more, the Chinese government has appropriated more than 200 million yuan in special funds to implement the religious policy in Tibet. The funds were used to renovate the Jokhang Monastery built in the 7th century, the Samye Monastery built by the king of the Tubo Kingdom in the 8th century, and the four famous monasteries of the Gelug Sect of Tibetan Buddhism -- Zhaibung, Sera, Gandan and Tashilhunpo. For the renovation of the Potala Palace alone, the central government allotted a lump sum of more than 40 million yuan. In 1984, the central government provided 6.7 million yuan in special funds, 111 kg of gold, 2,000 kg of silver and large quantities of jewelry for the renovation, under the direction of the late 10th Bainqen Lama, of the holy stupas and the memorial halls for the 5th to the 9th Bainqen Lamas. To date, more than 1,400 religious centers have been renovated and opened to the public, meeting the needs of the religious people for their normal religious life. The government has also exerted every effort to locate those Buddhist statues, instruments used in Buddhist services and other religious articles that got lost during the "cultural revolution" and distributed them to the various monasteries and temples, to the welcome of monks and lay people.
　　近年来，西藏各宗教团体自主地组织各种宗教活动。中国佛教协会西藏自治区分会于1983年创办了西藏佛学院，并在各教派的一些寺庙中开办了学经班，现有学僧近3000名。另外每年还推荐一定数量的活佛、学僧到北京，进入中国藏语系高级佛学院进修深造。1984年自治区人民政府将档案馆保存的《甘珠尔》藏文大藏经拉萨版赠送给自治区佛协，并资助50万元开办了拉萨印经院，几年来已印出1000多部《甘珠尔》藏文大藏经，供给区内外各藏语系佛教寺庙。1990年，自治区佛协又得到政府资助50万元，在拉萨木加寺开始刻制十三世达赖喇嘛想要刻制而未能付诸实施的《甘珠尔》藏文大藏经拉萨版。1985年佛协创办了《西藏佛教》刊物。现在全区有3.4万多名僧尼。当选为各级人大代表、政协委员、佛协理事以及在政府中任职的宗教界人士共有615人，他们参政、议政，同其他公民一样共同致力于西藏的各项建设事业。
In recent years, various religious organizations have organized religious activities on their own. The Tibet branch of the Buddhist Association of China established the Tibet College of Buddhism in 1983 and opened sutra studying classes in some monasteries and temples of various religious sects. There are a total of 3,000 monk students. Every year, a number of Living Buddhas and lamas are sent to the China Tibetan Language High Institute of Buddhism in Beijing for advanced studies. In 1984, the autonomous region's people's government presented the Lhasa edition of the Gangyur of Tripitaka in Tibetan, which used to be kept in local archives, to the Tibet Buddhist Association. It offered 500,000 yuan to the latter for the establishment of the Lhasa Sutra Printing House which, in recent years, has printed more than 1,000 volumes of the Gangyur of Tripitaka in Tibetan for Tibetan Buddhist monasteries and temples located both inside and outside the autonomous region. In 1990, with another 500,000 yuan proffered by the government, the Tibet Buddhist Association started the carving of printing blocks for the Lhasa edition of the Dangyur of Tripitaka in Tibetan in Lhasa's Muru Monastery. The 13th Dalai Lama had intended to commission the work, but the plan never materialized. The journal Tibetan Buddhism was launched by the Tibet Buddhist Association in 1985. Today, the region has more than 34,000 lamas and nuns. A total of 615 people from religious circles have become deputies to the people's congresses and members of the people's political consultative conferences at various levels, as well as directors of the Buddhist associations and government officials. They participate in the management and discussion of government affairs and devote themselves to Tibet's construction undertakings together with other local citizens.
　　政府尊重和保护各教派的传统宗教活动和习俗。根据藏传佛教的仪轨和历史惯例，活佛去世后按传统的办法转世传承。1992年6月25日，中央政府批准了第十六世噶玛巴活佛的转世灵童。对一年一度的拉萨传召大法会，传统的马年转大雪山、羊年转纳木神湖和热振寺坝子等活动，政府有关部门都前往斋僧布施。群众婚丧嫁娶仪式中与宗教有关的习俗都受到完全尊重。
The government respects and protects traditional religious activities and the rites of the various sects. According to the rituals of Tibetan Buddhism and historical traditions, after a Living Buddha passes away his position should be inherited by his incarnation through traditional methods. On June 25, 1992, the central government confirmed the incarnate soul boy of the 16th Living Buddha Garmaba. Government department officials attend such religious activities as the annual Grand Summons Ceremony in Lhasa, the pilgrimage to Snow Mountain in the Year of the Horse, the pilgrimage to the Holy Lake of Nam Co in the Year of the Sheep and the Walking-Around-Religious-Rock Festival at the Razheng Monastery, and offer alms each time. Wedding and funeral customs with religious links also receive full regard.
　　在西藏，由于认真贯彻执行了宗教信仰自由政策，各宗教、教派和寺庙之间，信教与不信教群众之间都相互尊重，和睦相处。同时，国家宪法也明确规定，任何人不得利用宗教进行破坏社会秩序、损害公民身体健康、妨碍国家教育制度的活动。对于利用宗教进行违法犯罪活动者，一律依法处理。近年来西藏有一些僧尼被依法治罪，都是因为触犯了刑律，如参加骚乱，危害社会治安，扰乱社会秩序，搞打、砸、抢、烧、杀等犯罪活动，没有一个是因宗教信仰而被拘捕判罪的。
Thanks to the earnest implementation of the policy on freedom of religious belief, different religions, sects, monasteries, and both religious and secular people in Tibet respect one another and live in harmony. China's Constitution also clearly stipulates that no one may make use of religion to engage in activities that disrupt public order, impair the health of citizens and hamper the country's educational system. Those who carry out law-breaking and conduct criminal activities under the guise of religion will be prosecuted according to law. In recent years, some monks and nuns in Tibet received legal retribution because they infringed on the law. They were involved in riots that endangered social security and disrupted public order, engaged in beating, smashing, looting, burning and killing and carried out other criminal activities. None was arrested and declared guilty because of religious belief.
　　西藏佛教组织和宗教界人士积极开展同外国宗教团体和宗教界人士之间的友好往来活动。改革开放以来，中国佛教协会西藏分会和一些寺庙，组织了宗教人士出国进行友好访问、参观、考察和学术交流；热情地接待了几十个国家前来西藏朝佛、参观、考察的团体和个人，共计一万多人次。
Buddhist organizations and religious circles in Tibet have actively carried out friendly exchanges with their counterparts abroad. Since China introduced reform and opening up, the Tibet branch of the Buddhist Association of China and some monasteries and temples have organized religious groups to go on friendly tours, visits, inspections and academic exchanges abroad. They have also hosted more than 10,000 people from several dozen countries who came, either in groups or individually, on pilgrimage, or for sightseeing or inspection tours.
　　西藏和平解放以来，很多著名的宗教界人士同中国共产党和政府合作共事，参政议政，为国家和西藏的建设事业发挥积极的作用，深受群众的敬仰和政府的尊重。与达赖喇嘛并为藏传佛教领袖的十世班禅额尔德尼·确吉坚赞几十年如一日，一直坚持爱国主义立场，在和平解放西藏、反对分裂等斗争中，为维护祖国统一，增强民族团结，做出了重大贡献。建国以来，他历任全国人民代表大会常务委员会副委员长、中国佛教协会名誉会长等职，于1989年元月圆寂。政府决定在日喀则扎什伦布寺修建十世班禅额尔德尼·确吉坚赞遗体灵塔和祀殿，按照藏传佛教的仪轨，举行宗教悼念活动，办理遗体保护以及转世灵童的寻访、认定等事宜。目前灵塔和祀殿主体工程已基本完成，寻访十世班禅转世灵童的工作正在扎什伦布寺恰扎·强巴赤列活佛的主持下顺利进行。
Since the peaceful liberation of Tibet in 1951, many noted religious figures have worked in co-operation with the Chinese Communist Party and the government, and participated in the management and discussion of government affairs. They have played an active part in the construction of the country and Tibet, earning the admiration of the people and winning the respect of the government. For several decades, the late 10th Bainqen Erdeni Qoigyi Gyaincan, co-leader of Tibetan Buddhism with the Dalai Lama, constantly adhered to a patriotic stand and made great contributions to the peaceful liberation of Tibet, to the struggle against separatism, to the safeguarding of the unification of the motherland and to the strengthening of the unity of various ethnic groups. After the founding of the People's Republic of China, he served as a vice-chairman of the NPC Standing Committee and the honorary president of the Buddhist Association of China. He passed away in January 1989. The government decided to build a holy stupa and memorial hall for the remains of the 10th Bainqen Erdeni Qoigyi Gyaincan in the Tashilhunpo Monastery in Xigaze, and hold memorial ceremonies, preserve his body and look for and choose the reincarnated soul boy to succeed him according to Tibetan Buddhist tradition. Currently, structures of the holy stupa and the memorial hall are basically completed, and the search for the child is proceeding smoothly under the charge of Living Buddha Qazha Qamba Chilai of the Tashilhunpo Monastery.
教育和文化的发展
 Development of Education and Culture
　　旧西藏教育十分落后，没有一所近代意义上的学校。西藏和平解放前，仅有2000余名僧侣和贵族子弟在旧式官办学校和私塾学习。广大农奴和奴隶没有接受教育的权利。
Education in old Tibet was very backward. There were no schools in the modern sense. Before Tibet's peaceful liberation, only some 2,000 monks and children of the nobility studied in government and private schools. The masses of serfs and slaves had no right to receive education.
　　根据“十七条协议”中有关逐步发展西藏民族的语言、文字和学校教育的规定，1952年拉萨小学建立，1956年拉萨中学建立，西藏走上了现代教育的轨道。
Under the stipulation of the 17-Article Agreement concerning the gradual development of the spoken and written Tibetan language and school education, the Lhasa Primary School was founded in 1952 and the Lhasa Middle School established in 1956. This enabled Tibet to embark on the road to modern education.
　　为发展西藏教育事业，国家四十年来累计投资11亿多元，并实施了一系列优惠政策。比如实行免费教育，藏族学生自小学直至大学毕业的学习费用全部由政府支付。从1985年起，又对部分藏族中小学学生实行包吃、包穿、包住政策，在广大农牧区学校推行寄宿制。各级各类学校招生实行“以当地民族为主”的原则，在大中专学校招生中，优先录取藏族等当地民族考生。进一步兴办藏语言文字、藏医学、藏族艺术、藏族历史等藏族文化系科（专业）、学校。
To develop education in Tibet, the government has invested more than 1.1 billion yuan and introduced a series of special policies over the past 40 years. Education is free. All the study costs of Tibetan students, from primary school to university, are covered by the government. Since 1985, free food, clothing and accommodation have been provided for some Tibetan primary and middle school students, and boarding schools have been introduced in the vast rural and pastoral areas. The principle of "giving priority to local nationalities" has been carried out in recruiting students for various kinds of schools at different levels. Priority is given to candidates of Tibetan and other local nationalities in the recruitment of university, college and secondary vocational school students. Efforts are being made to establish more departments and schools of Tibetan culture covering Tibetan language, medicine, art and history.
　　四十多年来，西藏已经基本建立起包括幼儿教育、小学教育、中学教育、中等专业技术教育、高等教育以及成人教育、电视教育等在内的具有西藏地方特色和民族特点的教育体系。广大城镇居民、农牧民享受到受教育的权利。据统计，到1991年，西藏已有西藏大学、民族学院、农牧学院和藏医学院4所现代大学，师范、农牧、卫生、藏医、财经、体育、艺术、邮电等中等专业技术学校15所，中学63所，小学2474所。在校生总人数达19.6万人，绝大多数是藏族学生；教职工达1.6万人，藏族教师占三分之二。大、中、小学建筑面积近150万平方米，电化教学成为重要的教学手段之一。四十多年来，西藏高等学校毕业生达1.8万人，中小学毕业生51万人，其中中专、高中、技工学校毕业生4万多人，培训轮训干部1.5万余人，另有近7000人次获成人自学中专、大专考试合格证书，为各项建设事业培养出大批人才。
Over the past four decades and more, Tibet has basically established an educational system with both special local flavor and national characteristics which includes pre-school, primary and middle school, secondary vocational and technical school education, plus higher education, and adult and television education. Urban residents, farmers and herdsmen now enjoy the right to receive education. According to statistics, by 1991, Tibet had established four modern universities (Tibet University, the Institute for Nationalities, the Agriculture and Animal Husbandry College and the Tibetan Medical College); 15 secondary vocational and technical schools involved in teacher training, agriculture and animal husbandry, public health, Tibetan medicine, finances, sports, art, and post and telecommunications; 63 middle schools and 2,474 primary schools. The total enrollment hit 196,000, with most being Tibetan students. Of the 16,000 faculty members, two-thirds were Tibetan teachers. The buildings of primary and secondary schools and institutes of higher learning covered nearly 1.5 million square meters, and audio-visual teaching had become an important means of instruction. In the last four decades and more in Tibet, 18,000 students graduated from universities and colleges; 510,000 from primary and secondary schools, including more than 40,000 from secondary vocational schools, senior middle schools and secondary technical schools; more than 15,000 cadres were trained in rotation; and nearly 7,000 people received certificates from secondary vocational and college-level self-study programs. A large number of professionals for all undertakings have thus been trained.
　　西藏教育事业的发展使人民群众文化素质普遍提高，为西藏人民更好地行使民族区域自治权利，实现民族全面发展创造了条件。但是，由于过去西藏教育的基础十分薄弱，西藏地区的人口居住过于分散，西藏人口中的文盲、半文盲虽已从过去的大多数人减为少数人，却仍占不小的比例。进一步发展西藏教育，仍是一个艰巨而紧迫的任务。
The development of education in Tibet has enhanced the cultural level of citizens, creating conditions for the Tibetan people to better exercise their right of regional autonomy as an ethnic minority and attain overall development. However, since the foundations of education in old Tibet were very weak and the population sparsely scattered, illiterates and semi-illiterates still make up a considerable proportion in Tibet's population, although they are now in the minority rather than in the majority, as they were in the past. Further development of education remains a strenuous and pressing task in Tibet.
　　西藏有着丰富的民族传统文化，包括语言文字、文学、艺术、哲学、宗教、医学、天文历算等。中国政府历来重视维护和发展西藏的优秀民族传统文化，采取了一系列尊重、保护和繁荣民族传统文化的政策和措施，使西藏文化得到继承和发展。
Tibet has a rich traditional culture which covers language, literature, art, philosophy, religion, medicine and the celestial almanac. The Chinese government has always attached importance to protecting and developing the excellent traditional culture of the Tibetan ethnic group. It has adopted a series of policies and measures to honor, protect and ensure the flourishing of Tibet's traditional culture, enabling the legacy of Tibetan culture to be inherited and developed.
　　藏语言文字是西藏全区通用的语言文字。1987年7月，自治区人民代表大会通过了《西藏自治区学习、使用和发展藏语文的若干规定（试行）》，明确规定在西藏自治区藏汉语文并重，以藏语文为主的原则。现在在西藏自治区，人大通过的决议、法规、法令，人民政府下达的正式文件、发布的布告，都用藏汉两种文字。报纸、广播、电视都用藏汉两种语言文字。自治区编辑出版的图书中，藏文图书占70%。自治区招工、招干、招生对不同语言文字使用者平等对待，优先照顾藏语文使用者。群众参加的各种大型会议都使用藏语文。所有单位、街道、路标和公共设施一律使用藏汉两种文字的标记。各级各类学校的藏语文课是学生的主课。
The Tibetan language is the common language for the whole autonomous region. In July 1987, the autonomous regional People's Congress adopted the Regulations on Study, Use and Development of the Tibetan Language in the Tibet Autonomous Region (for trial implementation), which clearly stipulates that both Tibetan and Chinese languages should be used in the Tibet Autonomous Region while first place is given to the Tibetan language. Today, all the resolutions, regulations and rules, the decrees adopted by the People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region and all the formal documents and notices issued by the autonomous regional people's government are in both Tibetan and Chinese. Newspapers, radio and television stations also use both languages. Of the books edited and published in the autonomous region, those in the Tibetan language make up 70 percent. Speakers of different languages are treated equally in the recruitment of workers, cadres and students, with priority always given to Tibetan speakers. Tibetan is used in large meetings attended by the masses. All work units, streets, roads and public facilities are marked in both Tibetan and Chinese script. The Tibetan language is the main subject of all schools at different levels.
　　藏族人民的传统风俗习惯受到广泛尊重。在西藏的城镇和农牧区，大多数藏族群众都依然保持着藏族服饰、饮食、住房的传统风格。每年，藏族群众以传统方式欢度藏历新年、雪顿节、酥油灯节、沐浴节、望果节、达玛节等藏族的传统节日。国家对民族必需品的生产采取优惠政策。
The Tibetan people's traditional customs and practices have received wide respect. In the cities, towns and agricultural and pastoral areas in Tibet, most Tibetans still retain their traditional clothing, diet and housing. Each year, the Tibetan people celebrate the Tibetan New Year, the Sour Milk Drinking Festival, the Butter Lamp Festival, the Bathing Festival, the Ongkor (Bumper Harvest) Festival and the Damar Festival in their time-honored ways. The government has introduced preferential policies to encourage the production of necessities for minority nationalities.
　　西藏地区的文物受到了全面的保护。布达拉宫、大昭寺等一批寺庙列为全国或自治区重点文物保护单位。从七十年代中期起，展开了系统的高原考古工作，先后发掘了石器时代的文化遗址数十处。各种出土文物由西藏文物管理部门妥善保管，为研究西藏原始文化和藏族传统文化提供了宝贵资料。
Cultural relics in Tibet are put under full protection. The Potala Palace, the Jokhang Monastery and some other monasteries and temples have become national or regional key cultural preservation centers. Since the mid-1970s, systematic plateau archeological studies have been carried out and several dozen cultural sites of the Stone Age excavated. All the unearthed cultural relics are carefully kept by the regional cultural relics management department, and these discoveries provide valuable materials for the study of primitive and traditional Tibetan culture.
　　对西藏民族传统文化遗产进行全面系统的普查、收集、整理、出版和研究。西藏藏文古籍出版社已收集到藏文古籍珍本200余部，整理出版了一批珍稀藏文古籍。西藏人民出版社重点整理出版了一批古典名著和历史档案丛书。截止1990年底，公开发行的藏文古籍已有200多种，100多万册。数百年来只有手抄本、木刻本，被禁锢、埋没的藏文典籍，第一次有了各种装帧精美的印刷版本。
The traditional cultural heritage of Tibetans has been systematically investigated, collected, collated, published and studied. The Tibetan Ancient Books Publishing House has collected more than 200 rare ancient books in Tibetan and collated and published a number of them. The Tibet People's Publishing House has pooled efforts to collate and publish a number of classics and booklets of historical archives. By the end of 1990, more than 1 million copies of 200 ancient Tibetan books had been distributed. Tibetan classics, which only existed in hand-written and engraved forms and were neglected for several hundred years, now, for the first time, have been printed in copies with exquisite binding.
　　西藏的民间文学、戏剧、音乐、舞蹈的搜集整理工作也卓有成效。20余部藏族民间文化作品和著述已经出版。《格萨尔王传》是藏族人民创作的世界上最长的英雄史诗，一直作为口头说唱艺术流传在藏族民间。对这部史诗的抢救、整理和研究工作被列为国家社会科学重点研究项目，并成立了专门机构。现已录制了3000多盘磁带，整理出版藏文版62部，发行300多万册。60余万字的《中国戏曲志·西藏卷》已经编竣，填补了西藏历史上戏剧理论著述和专题志书的空白。关于民族舞蹈、民间歌谣、藏戏音乐、曲艺音乐、器乐、曲艺、民歌、民间故事、谚语的集成志书，也在全面普查收集资料和整理编纂之中。
Marked achievements have also been made in the collection and collation of Tibetan folk literature, drama, music and choreography. More than 20 writings and books on Tibetan folk culture have been published. King Gesar, the world's longest epic created by the Tibetan people, existed only in oral memory among the Tibetan people and was performed using dialogue and singing. Today, the retrieval, collation and study of this epic has been included in the state's key social science research projects, and a special institution has been founded to take charge of the project. Up to now, more than 3,000 cassette tapes recording the epic have been made, and 62 volumes in the Tibetan language published with a total circulation exceeding 3 million copies. The 600,000-word History of Chinese Dramas: Tibetan Volume has been compiled, filling in a blank in theoretical writings and monographic studies on drama in Tibetan history. Materials are being garnered on the basis of surveys for the compilation of books about Tibetan dance, folk rhymes, music in Tibetan opera and folk art, instrumental music, folk art history, folk songs, folklore and proverbs.
　　藏学是研究藏族历史、宗教、文化、经济、政治、社会等各个领域的综合性学科。在西藏和其他一些地方现已建立了藏学研究机构50多个，并于1986年在北京成立了中国藏学研究中心。这些研究机构承担了大量研究课题，如西藏经济社会发展战略、简明西藏通史、梵文贝叶经的整理研究和西藏宗教源流与教派研究等项目；创办了《西藏研究》、《西藏佛教》、《西藏社会发展研究》、《西藏艺术研究》、《雪域文化》、《中国藏学》、《中国西藏》等近30种藏、汉、英文刊物。八十年代以来，随着西藏国际学术交流活动的逐渐开展，已有十多个国家和地区的130余名学者和旅居国外的藏胞学者来参观访问，进行学术考察和洽谈科研合作项目。一些藏族专家学者也应邀出国访问、讲学和参加学术会议。
Tibetology is a comprehensive branch of learning which embraces all areas, including Tibetan history, religion, culture, economics, politics and sociology. More than 50 Tibetan studies institutions have been founded in Tibet and other places, and the China Tibetan Studies Center was inaugurated in 1986 in Beijing. These research institutions have taken up numerous research projects, such as the strategy for socio-economic development in Tibet, a concise history of Tibet, the collation and study of Pattra in Sanskrit, and the study of the origin of Tibetan religions and religious sects. They have also launched nearly 30 journals in the Tibetan, Chinese or English languages, including Tibet Research, Tibetan Buddhism, Tibetan Social Development Study, Tibetan Art Study, Snowy Land Culture, China's Tibetan Studies, and China's Tibet. Since the 1980s, with the expansion of international academic exchange concerning the study of Tibet, 130-plus scholars from a dozen of countries and regions and Tibetan scholars residing abroad have visited Tibet, made academic surveys and conducted negotiations on joint scientific research projects. Some Tibetan experts and scholars were invited to go on tours, give lectures and participate in academic meetings abroad.
　　今天，西藏的传统文化艺术已由过去只供达官贵人们消遣转为面向广大人民群众，西藏人民的文化生活日益丰富。自治区现有专业歌舞、藏戏等艺术表演团体10个，县级文艺团体20个，业余演出队350多个；具备现代化设施的多功能群众艺术馆6座，县级文化馆25座。西藏现有一支近5000人的专业文化工作者队伍，其中藏族占90%。他们创作了一批具有浓郁民族风格和强烈时代气息的文艺作品和节目，有些作品还在国际上获奖。十余年来，西藏应邀出国演出的艺术团体有14个，表演艺术家近300人。在藏族各个传统节日期间，文化活动十分活跃，其中雪顿节已从传统的藏戏演出发展成为西藏一年一度最大的、包括各种文化艺术活动的综合性民族艺术节。西藏的民族传统体育活动也得到广泛开展。八十年代以来，收集、发掘并组织正规比赛的民族传统体育项目有10多个，在全国民族运动会上多次获奖。在传统节日里，西藏各地都举行传统体育项目的比赛和表演。西藏的现代竞技体育活动水平也不断提高，尤其是登山运动取得了举世瞩目的成绩。
Tibet's traditional culture and art, which only entertained high officials and noble lords in the past, now serve all Tibetan people, enriching their cultural life. The autonomous region has ten professional art and dance ensembles and Tibetan opera troupes, 20 county-level art troupes and more than 350 amateur performing troupes. There are six multi-purpose people's art centers equipped with modern facilities and 25 county-level cultural centers. Tibet now boasts a contingent of nearly 5,000 professional cultural workers, with Tibetans accounting for 90 percent of the total. They have created a number of literary and artistic works and programs which have a strong national flavor and reflect the features of our age, and some of their works have won international prizes. Over the past decade and more, 14 Tibetan art troupes composed of close to 300 artists were invited to give performances abroad. Cultural activities are very much in evidence during each traditional festival in Tibet. The Sour Milk Drinking Festival has expanded from performances of Tibetan operas to the largest annual art festival featuring all kinds of cultural and artistic activities. Traditional sports have been held extensively in Tibet too. Since the 1980s, more than ten traditional sports have been tapped and included in formal competitions. Tibetan athletes captured quite a few prizes at the National Sports Meet for Ethnic Groups. During traditional festivals, time-honored games and performances are held in all parts of Tibet. The modern athletic level in Tibet has been enhanced constantly and mountaineering, in particular, has attained internationally known achievements.
　　在传统文化活动活跃开展的同时，现代文化设施也进入了西藏。目前全自治区有电视台、电视录像转播台和电视差转台共计137座，卫星地面接收站297座，广播电台、转播台、发射台共26座，各地县有线广播站74个，初步形成覆盖全区的卫星传输、无线电传输和有线广播传输相结合的广播电视网。西藏现有电影发行放映机构82个，放映队553个，年发行新片近200部，农牧区免费放映电影。许多现代娱乐设施也已在西藏出现，传统文化活动与现代文化活动并存共荣。
While traditional cultural activities are flourishing in Tibet, modern cultural facilities have also made their way there. At present, Tibet has 137 television and TV video relay stations and television transposer stations, 297 ground satellite stations, 26 radio broadcasting, relay and transmitting stations, and 74 wire broadcasting stations at prefectural and county levels. A broadcasting and television network which covers the whole region and combines satellite and wireless transmission with wire broadcasting has initially taken shape in Tibet. The region now has 82 film distribution and projection agencies and 553 film projection teams. Nearly 200 new films are shown each year, and residents in agricultural and pastoral areas enjoy free film shows. Many modern recreational facilities have been built in Tibet to prosper both traditional and modern cultural activities.
人民健康和人口发展状况
 People's Health and Demographic Growth
　　封建农奴制度下的旧西藏，只有三所医疗设备极其简陋、规模有限的官办藏医机构和少量私人诊所，从业人员近百人，加上民间藏医也只有400余人，平均每千人口只有不到0.4名医务人员。这些藏医机构和人员主要为贵族、官员服务，广大农奴和奴隶有病得不到治疗。天花、鼠疫等烈性传染病屡有发生和流行。据记载，西藏和平解放前的150年间，天花大流行过四次，其中1925年的一次，仅拉萨地区就有7000人丧生。1934年和1937年的两次伤寒流行，拉萨又有5000余人死亡。当某些传染病暴发时，原西藏地方政府不但不采取措施救治病人，反而把病人赶进深山峡谷，派兵把守山口，将病人困死。根据历史资料记载，旧西藏人均寿命只有36岁，人口增长长期处于停滞状态。
Old Tibet, under the feudal serf system, had only three officially operated, small traditional Tibetan medical establishments, having simple and rough medical equipment, and a few private clinics. There were close to 100 practitioners. Even adding folk doctors of Tibetan medicine, the number totalled only about 400, averaging less than 0.4 per 1,000 people. These medical establishments and medical workers chiefly served the nobility and officials. Absolutely no medical treatment was given to the broad masses of serfs and slaves when they fell ill. Deadly infectious diseases such as smallpox and the plague occurred frequently and even ran rampant. According to records, in the 150 years before the peaceful liberation of Tibet in 1951, smallpox raged four times, and the contagion in 1925 caused 7,000 deaths in the Lhasa area alone. Epidemic typhoid fever in 1934 and 1937 took more than 5,000 lives in Lhasa. When some infectious diseases spun out of control, the former Tibetan local government did not take measures to save the afflicted but, on the contrary, drove them into high mountains or deep valleys, whose exits were guarded by troops. This resulted in the death of the expelled sufferers. Historical records show that in old Tibet, the average life span was 36 years, and the growth of the Tibetan population stagnated for a long time.
　　控制对西藏人民生命健康危害最烈的传染病，是西藏发展医疗卫生事业的首要任务。中国政府认真贯彻“预防为主”的方针，从六十年代初起，西藏再未发现过天花病例，各种传染病、地方病发病率大幅度下降，部分严重威胁人民健康的疾病已经消灭或基本控制。为了保护藏族儿童的健康成长，1986年以来，西藏广泛开展计划免疫，免疫接种率达85%以上。
The primary task facing Tibet in the development of public health care has been to gain control over the most deadly infectious diseases. The Chinese government conscientiously carries out the principle of "taking prevention as the main task," with the result that no case of smallpox has been reported in Tibet since the early 1960s. The incidence of various infectious and endemic diseases has gone down by a substantial margin, and some serious diseases that threaten the lives of people have been wiped out or brought under basic control. In order to assure the healthy growth of Tibetan children, a planned immunization program has been widely implemented in Tibet since 1986. Over 85 percent of children have been inoculated.
　　民主改革后，自治区逐步建立了遍布城乡的医疗卫生网。1991年全区卫生机构已有1197个，比1951年增加400倍；医院床位由1951年的零增加到5077张；专业卫生人员9740人，比1951年增加97倍，其中卫生技术人员7749人，藏族约占卫生技术人员总数的80%。西藏88%的人口在农牧区，1991年，西藏农牧区有卫生机构850个，医院床位2300张，专业卫生人员3700人。此外，还有3500名乡村医生和卫生员直接服务于农牧民群众。在西藏，平均每千人口拥有病床2.3张，医生2.1人，分别相当和高于全国平均数，也高于中等收入国家平均数。
After the Democratic Reform in 1959, the autonomous region gradually established a medical and health network throughout Tibet. In 1991, the region boasted 1,197 medical establishments, 401 times as many as in 1951. There were no hospital beds in 1951 but 5,077 in 1991. Professional medical workers numbered 9,740, or 98 times higher than in 1951. Among them 7,749 were health technicians, with Tibetans accounting for 80 percent of the total. Now, 88 percent of Tibetans are living in rural and pastoral areas, where there were 850 health establishments containing a total of 2,300 beds and 3,700 medical workers in 1991. A further 3,500 local rural doctors and health workers directly serve the masses of farmers and herdsmen. In Tibet, on average, there are 2.3 beds and 2.1 doctors per 1,000 people, figures equal to and above the national average respectively, and also higher than that of middle-income countries.
　　西藏的传统医学藏医、藏药得到继承和发展。政府投资2000万元新建了自治区藏医院住院部和五个地区藏医院。1991年，全区有藏医药人员1015名。为了适应藏医事业发展的需要，建立了藏医学院和藏医研究所，鼓励和支持著名老藏医著书立说，及时整理了一批年事已高的藏医药专家的宝贵经验。出版发行了藏医名著《四部医典》，编写出版了《四部医典系列挂图全集》、《医学百科全书－藏医分卷》、藏医《生理学》、《病理学》、《药理学》、《饮食学》、《新编藏医学》等数十种藏医教材或专著。藏药的生产也有了迅速发展，现已建立了三座藏药厂。
Traditional Tibetan medical science, comprising Tibetan medicine and pharmacology, has been handed down and developed. The government invested 20 million yuan in building a new inpatient department of the region's Hospital of Traditional Tibetan Medicine, as well as five local hospitals of this kind. In 1991, there were 1,015 Tibetan medicine doctors and pharmacists in the whole region. In order to meet the needs for the development of Tibetan medicine, the autonomous region founded the Tibetan Medical College and the Tibetan Medicine Research Institute, and encouraged and supported famous veteran Tibetan medicine doctors to write scholarly books. A chronology of valuable medical expertise was compiled by a group of aged specialists. The Four-Volume Medical Code, a famous book on Tibetan medical knowledge, was published and distributed. Efforts have also been made in the compiling and publishing of A Complete Collection of Wall Charts of the Four-Volume Medical Code and Medical Science Encyclopedia: Tibetan Medicine, plus dozens of teaching materials and special books about Tibetan medicine, including Physiology, Pathology, Pharmacology, Dietetics, and Newly Compiled Tibetan Medicine. Pharmaceuticals production is developing quickly too. Now, there are three Tibetan medicine factories.
　　西藏医学科研机构对危害西藏人民健康的高原病等疾病进行重点研究，取得了重要成果。西藏医疗工作者在高原肺水肿、高山昏迷和慢性高原病的抢救和治疗方面，一直处于国内外领先地位。
Scientific research institutes of Tibetan medicine have put more efforts into the study of plateau sickness and other diseases which endanger the lives of Tibetan people, and have achieved important research results. Tibetan medical workers are both domestic and international leaders in rescue and the treatment of plateau pneumochysis, mountain coma and chronic plateau sickness.
　　为了适应卫生人才培养的需要，在西藏民族学院设立了医疗系，建立了西藏自治区卫生学校和日喀则、昌都卫生学校。这些学校共培养了6000多名高中级卫生人员。1980年以来，西藏自治区卫生系统对在职卫生人员进行了5000余人次的培训，提高了他们的专业技术水平和管理水平。
To train more health workers, the Tibet Institute for Nationalities has opened a medical department. In addition, the Health School for the Tibet Autonomous Region has been established and another two in Xigaze and Qamdo. These schools have trained more than 6,000 high- and middle-ranking health workers. Since 1980, more than 5,000 health workers in the region have received on-the-job training, which has helped raise their professional and administrative levels.
　　政府对藏族人民实行人人免费医疗，加之医疗卫生条件大大改善，西藏人民的寿命和健康水平有了很大提高。平均期望寿命已由解放前的36岁提高到目前的65岁。1985年与1965年相比，拉萨地区藏族青少年平均身高增加8.8厘米，平均体重增加5.2公斤。
The government provides free medical care for all Tibetans. This, plus considerable improvements in medical and health conditions, has greatly raised the average life span and health level of the Tibetan people. Average life expectancy has risen from 36 years before liberation to 65 years at present. When compared with 1965, the average height and weight of young Tibetans in the Lhasa area increased by 8.8 cm and 5.2 kg respectively.
　　政府对藏族的计划生育采取特殊的政策，对占全区总人口88%的农牧民未实行计划生育，只是向他们宣传合理生育、优生优育。西藏虽然地域辽阔，但能够利用的土地资源很少，1991年人均占有耕地仅1.54亩，而人口增长很快，有必要控制人口的增长。1984年以来，自治区政府在全区藏族干部、职工和城镇居民中提倡和实行一对夫妇生育两个孩子。对汉族干部、职工则提倡和实行一对夫妇只生一个孩子。实行计划生育的人口仅约占西藏总人口的12%。在实行计划生育中，始终坚持“宣传为主、自愿为主、服务为主”的原则，制止任何形式的强制性堕胎。
The government has special policies on birth control in Tibet. Family planning is not practiced for the farmers and herds people who constitute 88 percent of the region's entire population. The government only conducts publicity campaigns to inform them about rational births and ways to have healthy babies. Tibet has a vast expanse of territory, but few land resources which can be developed. In 1991, the average amount of cultivated land per person was only 1.54 mu. As Tibet's population has been increasing at a fast rate, population control is necessary. Since 1984, the regional government has advocated and carried out the policy of two children per couple among Tibetan cadres, workers and the staff of enterprises and residents in cities and towns. However, among the Han cadres, workers and staff members in Tibet, the policy of one child per couple has been advocated and enforced. Only 12 percent of the people in Tibet are covered by the family planning policy. In the process of carrying out family planning, the government always persists in the principle of "mainly publicity, volunteering, and service," and prohibits any form of forced abortion.
　　四十年来，西藏人口迅速增长。1950年至1990年，西藏人口净增119.6万人，其中藏族人口由100万增加到200多万，增长一倍多。1951年西藏和平解放时，西藏地方政府没有准确的人口统计。1953年，中国进行第一次全国人口普查，当时由达赖喇嘛为首的西藏地方政府申报西藏人口为100万。1964年第二次全国人口普查，西藏人口为125.1万，其中藏族人口120.9万，占人口总数的96.63%。1982年第三次全国人口普查，西藏人口为189.2万，其中藏族人口178.6万，占人口总数的94.4%。1990年第四次全国人口普查，西藏人口为219.6万，其中藏族人口209.6万，占人口总数的95.46%。汉族和其他民族人口始终占5%左右。1970年以来，西藏的人口出生率、自然增长率均高于全国平均水平。1982年至1990年，西藏藏族人口增长30.98万，自然增长率为17.34‰，高于同期全国平均人口自然增长率2.64个千分点。如果不是废除封建农奴制，经济得到发展，人民生活和医疗卫生条件得到很大改善，西藏地区的人口出生率和自然增长率不可能在这样短的时间里达到较高水平。
Over the past 40 years, the population of Tibet has rapidly mounted. Between 1950 and 1990, there was a net increase of 1.196 million people in Tibet, with the number of Tibetans climbing to more than 2 million, more than double the figure of 1 million in 1950. In 1951, when Tibet was peacefully liberated, there were no accurate population statistics provided by Tibetan local government. When China conducted the first national census in 1953, the Tibetan local government headed by the Dalai Lama reported that there were 1 million people in Tibet. The second national census in 1964 showed that the population in Tibet was 1.251 million, of which 1.209 million were Tibetans, making up 96.63 percent of the total. The third national census in 1982 said there were 1.892 million people in Tibet, of whom 1.786 million were Tibetans, accounting for 94.4 percent. The fourth national census in 1990 showed that there were 2.196 million people in Tibet, of whom 2.096 million, or 95.46 percent, were Tibetans. People of the Han and other non-Tibetan nationalities have always made up around 5 percent of the total population in Tibet. Since 1970, the birth rate and natural population growth have both been above the average national level. Between 1982 and 1990, there was an increase of 309,800 ethnic Tibetans in Tibet, and the rate of natural population increase was 17.34 per thousand, 2.64 perthousand points higher than that of the national level in the same period. For Tibet, it is impossible to reach such relatively high levels in terms of birth rates and the natural growth rates of population in so short a period of time without the abolition of the feudal serf system, and economic growth plus the obvious improvement of people's living standards and medical and health conditions.
　　在西藏的人口问题上，达赖集团散布了许多谎言。最耸人听闻的谣言之一是说西藏和平解放后被杀了120万人。以达赖为首的西藏地方政府在1953年提供的西藏人口数字不过100万人，果真以后杀了120万人，那么西藏的人早就完全被杀光了，更不可能发展为200多万人。
On the question of the size of the Tibetan population, the Dalai clique has spread many rumors. The most sensational was that more than 1.2 million people were killed after the peaceful liberation of Tibet. In 1953, the Tibetan local government under the Dalai Lama reported the population stood at 1 million people. If 1.2 million inhabitants had been massacred, it would have been a case of genocide and certainly the population in Tibet could not have increased to the present 2 million.
　　达赖集团又说，西藏不只是现在的范围，还包括四川、青海等藏族聚居的地方，共有600多万人。所谓大西藏不过是帝国主义企图瓜分中国而策划的阴谋。经过漫长的历史变迁，藏族除聚居于西藏之外，还分别聚居在四川、青海、甘肃、云南等省的一些地区。但这些地区过去就不属西藏行政区划范围，原西藏地方政府也未曾管辖过西藏以外的其他藏族聚居区。十三世纪始，元朝、明朝中央政府即对西藏和其他各藏族聚居地区分别管辖。清朝中央政权更进一步明确了各藏区的行政区划。民国时期，西藏以外的藏族聚居区仍分别由原属省管辖。中华人民共和国成立以后，基本上维持原来的行政区划，在四川、青海、甘肃、云南四省的藏族聚居区建立了十个藏族自治州、两个藏族自治县。包括西藏和各省藏族聚居区的藏族人口，总共也没有600万人。在1953年全国普查人口时，全国包括西藏在内的藏族人口是277万，1990年人口普查时，全国藏族人口为459万。和西藏一样，其他地方的藏族人口也有了大幅度的增加。
The Dalai Lama clique has also contended that geographically Tibet extends far beyond the boundaries of today, including areas inhabited by the Tibetans in Sichuan, Qinghai and other places, making a total population of 6 million. This so-called Tibet Major is merely a conspiracy hatched by imperialists in an attempt to carve up China. As a result of long historical changes, ethnic Tibetans have settled not only in Tibet but also in areas in Sichuan, Qinghai, Gansu and Yunnan provinces. But these areas were not under the jurisdiction of Tibet in the past, and the former Tibetan local government never administered any Tibetan-inhabited areas beyond Tibet. From the 13th century on, the central governments of the Yuan and Ming dynasties placed Tibet and other areas with Tibetan populations under separate administrations. The Qing Dynasty further defined administrative divisions in Tibetan-inhabited areas. During the period of the Republic of China, Tibetan-inhabited areas beyond Tibet remained under the jurisdiction of the provinces where they were located. These administrative divisions basically remained after the founding of the People's Republic of China. In the Tibetan-inhabited areas of the four provinces of Sichuan, Qinghai, Gansu and Yunnan, ten Tibetan autonomous prefectures and two Tibetan autonomous counties were set up. The Tibetan population, including Tibetans in Tibet and Tibetan-inhabited areas of other provinces, fell short of 6 million. When China conducted the first national census in 1953, the overall Tibetan population, including those residing in Tibet, totalled 2.77 million. The 1990 national census gave a count of 4.59 million people. As in Tibet, the numbers of Tibetans in other areas had grown considerably over the period between the two censuses.
　　还有一个对不了解实际情况的人有极大蛊惑性的谎言是说汉人大量移民，使西藏的藏族成为少数民族。西藏的自然条件极为严酷，低氧严寒，大部分为高山、荒漠、永久性冰雪地带。生活习惯更与内地不同，内地人极难适应。西藏不是过去美国的西部，可以大批移民开发。历次全国人口普查的统计数字，已彻底戳穿了这种在西藏汉族人口超过藏族的谎言。
Another lie is the claim that a large number of Hans have migrated to Tibet, turning the ethnic Tibetans into a minority. It is very easy to confuse and poison the minds of people who are not aware of the truth. In Tibet, the natural conditions are harsh, the air is oxygen-poor and the climate is bitterly cold. Most of the land consists of mountains, wilderness, and permafrost and snow zones. Customs there are so different from those in the heartland of the country that people from the interior can hardly adapt to them. Tibet is not like the western part of the United States, where large numbers of people moved in for development. The figures from various national censuses have thoroughly exploded the lie that the Han population in Tibet has already surpassed that of the Tibetans.
十一、生存环境的保护
 Protection of Living Environment
　　在大力发展西藏经济建设的同时，人民政府非常重视西藏的环境保护。西藏自治区认真贯彻了保护环境的国家基本政策，坚持经济建设、城乡建设和环境建设同步规划、同步实施、同步发展的战略方针；实行预防为主、谁污染谁治理和强化环境管理三项政策。西藏自治区人大常委会和人民政府根据西藏的实际，陆续颁布了一系列保护环境和自然资源的地方法规和行政规章，如《西藏自治区森林保护条例》、《西藏自治区草原管理暂行规定》、《西藏自治区人民政府关于保护水产资源的布告》等等，仅野生动物保护方面的规章就有20余件。1975年，自治区设立了环境保护机构，加强了对全区环境保护工作的统一监督管理。1990年，西藏自治区环境保护委员会成立，统一领导全区的环境保护工作。
While vigorously developing Tibetan economy, the people's government attaches great importance to environmental protection in Tibet. Conscientiously carrying out the state's basic policy on environmental protection, the Tibet Autonomous Region perseveres in its strategy of synchronized planning and undertaking of economic, urban, rural and environmental construction. It has implemented the three policies of making preventive measures a priority, assigning responsibility to those who created pollution to clearing it up and intensifying environmental control. The Standing Committee of the People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region and the people's government of the autonomous region have published a series of local laws and regulations, as well as administrative rules and systems, covering the protection of environment and natural resources in line with actual local conditions. Examples are the Regulations for the Protection of Forests in the Tibet Autonomous Region, the Provisional Regulations of the Tibet Autonomous Region on Administration of Grasslands and the Notice of the People's Government of the Tibet Autonomous Region on the Protection of Aquatic Resources. In the field of wildlife protection alone, there are more than 20 documents on related regulations and systems. In 1975, the autonomous region set up an environmental protection institution to beef up unified supervision and administration over environmental protection work. In 1990, the Environmental Protection Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region was established to take charge of such undertakings in the whole region.
　　西藏自治区开展的生态环境建设，取得了很大的成绩。全区已建成大小灌溉水渠1.3万多条，水库、塘坝5200余座，总库容2.7亿多立方米；河道堤防工程18处，堤防总长约250公里。多年来，坚持合理使用化肥和农药，对草场采取围栏养贮、引水灌溉和保护管理措施；开发河滩，种树种草；实行分季轮牧，禁止盲目开荒破坏草场。到1990年底，全区草场围栏面积达18.3万公顷，草场灌溉面积16.1万公顷，灭鼠、灭虫、灭毒草面积118.7万公顷。全区生态环境不断得到改善。
The region has also made considerable headway in improving ecological environment. It has seen the building of over 13,000 major and minor irrigation channels, some 5,200 large and small reservoirs able to hold more than 270 million cubic meters of water, and 18 river embarkment projects, with a total length of about 250 km. For many years, chemical fertilizers and pesticides have been employed on a sound basis. Many measures have been taken to protect grasslands, such as enclosure with fences for livestock breeding and irrigation. Efforts have also been made to develop river banks and plant trees and grass. A rational system of rotation of herds has been enforced, and efforts have been made to prevent the blind reclamation of wasteland at the expense of grassland. By the end of 1990, the total area of fenced grassland had reached 183,000 hectares, while 161,000 hectares were under irrigation. Rats, pests and virulent plants have been kept under control over 1.187 million hectares of grassland. The region's ecological environment has improved steadily.
　　与此同时，全区坚持开展植树造林，护林防火，封山育林，制止乱砍滥伐。六十年代初至今，全区植树7000多万株，每年封山育林约14万公顷。西藏现有森林面积632万公顷，其中人工林面积2.2万公顷，森林面积每年都在增加，林木生长量大于消耗量。全区已建成7个自然保护区，正在建设和规划中的5个，总面积32.53万平方公里，约占全区面积的26.5%，使一批珍稀野生动植物得到有效保护。
Work has simultaneously proceeded on tree planting, the safeguarding of forests and the prevention of forest fires. Hillsides have been closed off for forest conservation and the destructive lumbering of forests banned. From the early 1960s to the present, the region has planted 70 million trees and hillsides closed off for forest conservation reached 140,000 hectares a year. Tibet now has 6.32 million hectares of forests, of which 22,000 hectares have been planted by people in the region. Forested areas have been expanding every year, with the increase in standing timber greater than that of felled lumber. The region has set up seven nature reserves, while another five are under construction or in the planning stage. Reserves are to reach 325,300 square km, accounting for 26.5 percent of the region's total area, effectively protecting rare wildlife and plants.
　　西藏坚持因地制宜，积极发展水电站建设，推广利用地热能、太阳能及风能。解放以来，全区已建成水电站424座，装机容量10.97万千瓦，地热电站2座，推广太阳能灶17750台，建太阳房10.5万平方米，推广太阳能热水器1.9万平方米，引进风力发电机700多台。使用这些无污染能源对保护环境起到了重要作用。
In accordance with local conditions, Tibet has steadfastly pressed ahead with construction of hydropower stations and worked hard to exploit geothermal energy resources and popularize the use of solar and wind energy. The region has since liberation built 424 hydropower stations with a total installed generating capacity of 109,700 kw, and two geothermal power stations. The use of solar energy stoves has been introduced throughout the region, with the figure reaching 17,750. Over 105,000 square meters of solar energy housing have been built and 19,000 square meters of solar energy heating devices have been installed. In addition, the region has introduced some 700 wind-driven generators. The use of these pollution-free energy resources plays an important role in the protection of the environment.
　　在进行生态环境建设的同时，西藏加强了环境管理。对一切影响环境的建设项目，坚持实行“环境影响评价”制度和治理污染设施与主体工程同时设计、同时施工、同时投产制度。对原有的一些污染源进行了治理。全区工业废气处理率已达80%。同时，还完成了西藏工业污染源调查、西藏土壤环境背景值调查研究、西藏环境天然放射性水平调查研究、西藏野生植物资源调查、西藏野生动物资源调查等项工作，为保护西藏的环境，合理利用资源，发展西藏经济提供了科学依据。在城乡建设中，坚持合理规划和布局，搞好配套建设，区内城市基础设施有所增强，拉萨市人均绿地达到12平方米，绿地覆盖率17.6%。为了及时掌握全区环境质量状况，自治区在拉萨建立了环境监测站，日喀则、昌都地区的环境监测站也正在建设中。
While bolstering the ecological environment, Tibet is strengthening environmental administration. For all construction projects that might affect the environment, the region follows the "environmental impact appraisal" system and the system of designing, building and putting into operation pollution treatment facilities and construction projects at the same time. Some sources of pollution have been curbed. Industrial waste gas disposal has reached 80 percent. Meanwhile, efforts have been made to investigate the origins of industrial pollution in Tibet, investigate and study the background value of soil environment, investigate and study the natural radioactive level in the environment, and investigate wild plant and animal resources. These provide a scientific basis for environmental protection, rational use of natural resources and economic development in Tibet. In the field of urban and rural construction, the region has coupled rational planning and distribution with construction of basic supportive projects. Urban infrastructure facilities have increased in the region. In Lhasa, green areas make up 17.6 percent of the city's total area, with an average per-person share of 12 square meters. In order to have timely information on the quality of the region's environment, the Tibet Autonomous Region has established the Environmental Monitoring Station in Lhasa. Two more are under construction in Xigaze and Qamdo.
　　根据监测，目前西藏的环境状况保持良好状态。大气、水环境基本没有受到污染。全区没有出现酸雨，城市大气中总悬浮微粒年日均值为340微克/立方米，大大好于国家大气环境质量的要求。水体除个别河段轻度污染外，全区江河湖泊水质良好。环境辐射在正常范围之内，不存在任何人为造成的放射性污染。达赖集团到处散布中国在西藏存贮核废料，这完全是无中生有。
According to the monitoring station, environmental conditions are good in Tibet. Generally speaking, there is no pollution of the atmosphere or water. No acid rain has fallen in the region. The annual level of suspended particulate matter in the urban atmosphere averages 340 microgram/cubic meter a day, well within state standards. Apart from slight pollution in several sections of rivers, the water quality of the region's rivers and lakes is good. Radioactive elements are at the normal background level, causing no deleterious pollution. The Dalai Lama clique's accusations that China has stored its nuclear wastes in Tibet are therefore purely fiction.
　　当然，西藏的生态环境也有不尽如人意的地方，如草场质量趋于下降；有些珍稀动物分布范围在逐渐缩小。对此，西藏自治区人民政府强化了管理和宣传教育，对破坏环境保护的违法行为严厉制裁，使近些年来一些濒危动物如黑颈鹤、羚羊、虎等又得到了繁殖发展。
Of course, some undesirable environmental problems do sometimes arise. For example, the quality of grassland tends to deteriorate, and the habitat of some rare animals is gradually shrinking. The people's government of the Tibet Autonomous Region has taken counter-measures by strengthening administration, publicity and education. Serious penalties are meted out to those who violate the laws and regulations on environmental protection. As a result, the numbers of some animals on the verge of extinction, such as black-necked cranes, takins and tigers, have increased in recent years.

国家对西藏发展的特殊支持
Special State Aid for Tibet's Development

西藏素有“世界屋脊”之称，自然条件十分严酷。全区平均海拔高度在4000米以上，空气稀薄，低温缺氧，气压和含氧量都不及平原地区的三分之二，气温在10摄氏度以上的时间还不及中国最北部的黑龙江省的一半，可耕地仅占总面积的0.2%至0.3%。高原气候和地理环境极大地制约着经济的发展。为改变西藏的落后面貌，促进各民族共同繁荣，中央政府和全国人民对西藏倾注了巨大的关心，在人力、物力、财力、技术和政策等方面给予了大力支持和特殊照顾。
Known as the "Roof of the World," Tibet has quite harsh natural conditions. The region is more than 4,000 metres above sea level on the average. The air there is thin, cold and oxygen deficient and its barometric pressure and oxygen content are less than two-thirds of those at lower altitude plains. The duration of time with a temperature of above ten degrees Centigrade is less than half that in Heilongjiang Province in northernmost China. Only 0.2-0.3 percent of it is arable. Local economic development is slowed down by the plateau climate and geographic conditions. To change this backward situation and promote the common prosperity of all ethnic groups, the central government and the people of the whole country have offered great support to Tibet in terms of labor, materials, finances and technology as well as in policies, demonstrating their special concern.
　　四十年来，国家给西藏的财政补贴累计达157亿元，用于西藏重点建设项目的基建投资42.7亿元，两项合计近200亿元。除中央财政补贴和基本建设投资外，国务院各部委还根据西藏各项事业发展的需要，给予多种专项补助。仅1979年至1986年，此类补助即达59亿元。最近几年，国家对西藏的投入大幅度增长，1991年各项资金投入达到17亿元。目前，国家每年给西藏的财政补贴为10亿元，按人均计算，在全国各省、自治区、直辖市中是最高的。国家的大量投资，使西藏农牧业、能源、交通、邮电通信等基础产业和基础设施以及教育文化事业得以初步改变落后状况，为西藏经济、文化的较快发展奠定了物质基础。
Over the last four decades, state financial subsidies to the region reached 15.7 billion yuan and investment in key capital construction projects stood at 4.27 billion yuan, for a total investment of close to 20 billion yuan. Apart from state financial subsidies and capital construction investment, the region has received a multitude of special subsidies granted by ministries and commissions under the State Council in accordance with Tibet's need to develop various undertakings. Such special subsidies amounted to 5.9 billion yuan in the period of 1979-86. State financial input in the region has increased by a substantial margin in the last few years and reached 1.7 billion yuan in 1991. At present, the state financial subsidies to the region average 1 billion yuan a year, the nation's top per-capita figure. State investment has brought initial changes to the backward situations in agriculture, livestock breeding, energy, communications, post and telecommunications and other basic industries and infrastructures as well as education and culture, laying a sound material foundation for rapid economic and cultural development in Tibet.
　　为满足西藏人民生产、生活资料的需求，国家在运输距离长、运输条件十分困难的情况下，每年调集大批物资进藏。1959年到1991年，从内地共调进粮食138.8万吨，石油成品油281.5万吨和价值45.8亿元的各类工业品，各类进藏物资总重量达1000多万吨。
To meet the Tibetan people's needs for production and subsistence, the central government sends large quantities of materials there every year, despite the long distance and poor transport conditions. From 1959 to 1991, a total of 1.388 million tons of grain, 2.815 million tons of refined oil and 4.58 billion yuan worth of manufactured goods, weighing over 10 million tons in total, were hauled in from the hinterland.
　　中央和内地各省市大力支援西藏的经济、文化建设，修建了穿越海拔五六千米高山的川藏、青藏等公路干线、格尔木至拉萨输油管道、羊八井地热电站等大中型基础设施。为了加速西藏的建设，1984年2月，中央组织内地九省市的人力、物力，用一年多时间，在西藏修建了包括能源、交通、建材、商业、文化、体育、教育、卫生、旅游、市政建设等43项工程，总建筑面积23.6万平方米，投资达4.8亿元，使用水泥、钢材和其他建筑物资总重量超过20万吨。
To aid economic and cultural construction in Tibet, the central government and other provinces and municipalities have pooled efforts together to build the Sichuan-Tibet, Qinghai-Tibet and other trunk highways that cross mountains 5,000-6,000 metres above sea level, a finished oil transmission pipeline from Golmud to Lhasa, the Yangbajain Geothermal Power Station and other large and medium-sized infrastructure facilities. To speed up construction in the region, the central government in February 1984 organized manpower and materials from nine provinces and municipalities in the interior to aid 43 construction projects in Tibet, the task taking more than one year. These projects, involving energy, communications, building materials, trade, culture, sports, education, public health, tourism and municipal works, covered a construction area of 236,000 square metres, involved a total investment of 480 million yuan and consumed more than 200,000 tons of cement, rolled steel and other building materials.
　　为了解决西藏缺少科技人才问题，国家各有关部门和全国各省市对西藏各地区实行对口支援，动员大批专业技术人员，包括各类科技人员、工程技术人员、专业管理人员、教师和医务工作者，进藏参加建设。对重点工程建设，组织各方面的专家、学者和工程技术人员进藏进行调查研究、编制规划、勘察设计、指导施工。1973年到1991年，全国十多个省、市先后派出了总计3000多人的医疗队进藏，向藏族医务工作者传授医疗技术，深入工厂、农牧区为广大群众防治疾病。内地各医学院校还努力为西藏培训医务人员，有70%的藏族医务人员在内地进修学习过，技术业务水平显著提高。1974年到1988年，支援西藏的教师达2969人。许多省、市和院校为西藏各类学校培养、培训师资和管理人员。国家每年还统一分配一定数量的高等师范本科毕业生和研究生支援西藏教育。从1985年起，内地24个省、市开办西藏中学或西藏班，对在内地学习的藏族学生在学习、生活上给予特别的优待。据1991年统计，在内地西藏班、校学习的学生达9800人。
Tibet is in short supply of scientific and technical personnel. To solve this problem, relevant government departments and other provinces and municipalities have been asked to aid their counterparts in the region. Large numbers of technicians including scientists, engineers, managerial personnel, teachers and medical workers have been encouraged to take their skills to Tibet. For key construction projects, experts, scholars, engineers and technicians have been organized to conduct investigation and study, planning, prospecting, designing and construction. From 1973 to 1991, medical teams composed of more than 3,000 medical workers from a dozen provinces and municipalities were sent to the region to train Tibetan medical workers and prevent and cure diseases for factory workers, farmers and herdsmen. Medical colleges and schools in the hinterland have started training classes to improve the skills of Tibetan medical workers. Thus far, about 70 percent of the Tibetan medical workers have received such training. From 1974 to 1988, a total of 2,969 teachers were sent to Tibet to teach. Many colleges and universities in many provinces and municipalities have trained teachers and managerial personnel for various kinds of schools in the region. Each year a certain number of teachers' college graduates, including some post-graduates, are assigned teaching jobs in Tibet. Since 1985, Tibetan middle schools and Tibetan classes have been established in 24 interior provinces and municipalities to offer education to Tibetan students, who also enjoy special care in study and life. In 1991 some 9,800 Tibetan students were studying in these schools or classes in the hinterland.
　　所有由内地到西藏的人员，都要遇到高山反应、生活习惯很不适应等种种困难，但为了响应政府支援西藏人民的号召，他们不惜付出很大个人牺牲，自觉服从调动。政府也照顾实际情况，规定了定期轮换等办法。
All those who go from the hinterland to Tibet experience many difficulties. They have to make a major effort to overcome mountain sickness and extremely different customs and habits in order to adjust to life in Tibet. By responding to the central government's call to aid the Tibetan people, they show they are willing to work in the region and do not hesitate to make personal sacrifices. They go there for a fixed period of time on rotation in accordance with the stipulation of the central government.
　　国家在西藏实行了一系列比内地优惠得多的经济政策和灵活措施，以增强西藏经济的内部活力，加快西藏的经济建设。1980年以来，西藏农牧区实行以家庭经营为主的多种经营方式，“土地归户使用，自主经营，长期不变”，“牲畜归户，私有私养、自主经营、长期不变”。农畜产品的销售以市场调节为主。对农牧民免征农牧业税。生产销售民族必需品的集体、个体工商企业免征工商税。农牧民个人和集体上市出售、交换农牧副和手工业产品，一律不收税。在对外开放方面，实行了比其他地区更为优惠的办法，外贸出口享受全部外汇留成，允许西藏在内地转销一般性进口商品。最近，西藏自治区政府还决定依照国家扩大开放的政策，建立对外经济技术开发区；增加边境开放口岸；允许对外商划地租赁；扩大与周边邻国的边民贸易和转口贸易。
The central government has introduced a series of more preferential economic policies and more flexible measures compared to those enjoyed by the interior provinces and municipalities in order to reinvigorate Tibet's economy and speed up economic construction there. Since 1980 agricultural and pastoral areas in Tibet have introduced diversified economic reforms focussing on household production. The policy is for farmers to cultivate land independently and for herdsmen to own the domestic animals they raise and conduct their own management, a policy which will remain unchanged for quite a long period of time. Farm and livestock products are sold mainly through the market. Farmers and herdsmen are exempt from agricultural and livestock taxes; collective and private industrial and commercial enterprises which produce and sell national necessities are exempt from industrial and commercial taxes. Farmers and herdsmen, individually or collectively, need pay no taxes for selling or exchanging their farm produce, livestock products or handicrafts. In opening up, the region implements a more preferential policy than other areas. It can retain all foreign exchange it earns from overseas trade and sell general imported products in the hinterland. Recently, the government of the Tibet Autonomous Region decided to set up foreign economic and technological development zones in accordance with the state policy on opening wider to the outside world; increase the number of open border ports; allow the foreign business people to lease land; and expand border trade with neighboring countries and entrepot trade.
　　从1991年开始，西藏进入了实施第八个五年计划和十年规划时期。为继续搞好经济文化建设，实现使大多数西藏人民的生活达到小康水平的目标，国家将继续对西藏给予大力扶持，已经确定了由国家投资在西藏建设的重大项目的发展规划，这些项目包括：
Tibet started to implement the Eighth Five-Year Plan and the Ten-Year Program in 1991. To further accelerate Tibet's economic and cultural construction and attain the target of a comfortable lifestyle for most Tibetans, the central government will continue to offer great support to Tibet. State-invested projects in Tibet have been established and written into a development program. The construction projects include the following:
　　从1991年开始，投资10亿元，在雅鲁藏布江、拉萨河和年楚河中部流域河谷地带进行综合开发工程，把这一地区逐步建成西藏的商品粮基地、副食品基地，轻纺手工业和食品加工基地以及科技示范推广基地。
A project started in 1991 with a total investment of 1 billion yuan for the comprehensive development of the drainage area of the middle reaches of the Yarlung Zangbo, Lhasa and Nyang Qu rivers. The project is designed to turn the area into bases for producing commodity grain, non-staple food, light industrial goods, textiles, handicrafts and processed food as well as for popularizing scientific and technological research achievements.
　　投资8亿元，兴建被列为国家能源“八五”计划重点建设项目的羊卓雍湖抽水蓄能电站。1997年电站全部建成后，将从根本上缓解拉萨及周围地区电力供应紧张局面。
A project with an investment of 800 million yuan to build the Yamzhog Yumco Pump-Storage Power Station, one of the state's key energy construction projects during the Eighth Five-Year Plan (1991-95). Upon completion in 1997, the station will help ease the power shortage in Lhasa and the surrounding area.
　　投资十几亿元对西藏的青藏、川藏、黑昌、中尼四条主要公路干线进行整治和改建，确保西藏经济命脉公路运输的畅通。四条公路的整治、改建工程已于1991年全面展开。
A project to rebuild the Qinghai-Tibet, Sichuan-Tibet, Nagqu-Qamdo and China-Nepal highways with an investment of over 1 billion yuan. The reconstruction of these four trunk highways designed to ensure smooth highway transportation began last year.
　　扩建拉萨贡嘎机场，跑道已于1991年9月竣工，可起降波音747等大型客机。
The expansion of the Gonggar Airport in Lhasa. The runway which was completed in September 1991 can be used by Boeing 747s and other jumbo passenger aircraft.
　　建设拉萨市邮政枢纽楼，新增程控自动电话1.1万门，建成47个县的54个卫星地面站及配套设施。
The construction of the Lhasa Post and Telecommunications Center, that entails the addition of 11,000-channel program-controlled telephone exchanges and 54 ground satellite stations in 47 counties, and other facilities.
　　西藏的现实充分说明，西藏人民摆脱封建农奴制后，获得了空前未有的广泛的人权。当然，由于西藏的经济、文化仍然比较落后，以及恶劣的自然地理环境的限制，西藏人民享有的人权还是不充分的，还需要不断作艰巨的努力，来改善人权的状况，这正是中国政府和人民在全力进行的。但是，无论从人权的哪个方面来说，现在的状况与封建农奴制的旧西藏相比，都已经有了天壤之别，达赖集团和国际反华势力打着“人权卫士”的旗号，对过去封建农奴主剥夺藏族人民一切人权的黑暗、野蛮、残酷丝毫不加谴责，却不顾谎言一再被揭穿，四处散布翻身作了国家主人的藏族人民丧失了人权。他们的目的无非是混淆视听，制造混乱，以达到梦寐以求的分裂中国、攫取西藏，进而颠覆社会主义中国的野心。所谓西藏的人权问题，实质在此。
The realities in Tibet fully show that the Tibetan people, who have shaken off the yoke of feudal serfdom, now enjoy extensive human rights which they have never been able to enjoy before. But their human rights are not yet complete because of Tibet's backward economy and culture and its harsh geographic conditions. Continuous and sustained efforts should be made to improve the human rights situation. The Chinese government and people are trying their best to accomplish this. However, the human rights the Tibetan people enjoy today are poles apart from those under feudal serfdom. The Dalai clique and international anti-China forces, who flaunt the banner of "champions of human rights," do not denounce the dark, savage and cruel feudal serfdom at all, under which the Tibetan people were deprived of all human rights by the serf-owners. But they continue to tell lies even after lies they told previously have been exploded, alleging that the Tibetan people, who have become masters of the country, have lost their human rights. Their purpose is to mislead the public and create confusion in an attempt to realize their dream of dis-membering China, seizing Tibet and finally subverting socialist China. Here lies the essence of the issue of so-called human rights in Tibet.
　　任何分裂中国的图谋，都是不能得逞的。西藏人民和中国其他各族人民的紧密相联有着几千年悠久的历史，西藏地区和中国各省区统一为一个国家也已有七个世纪，在这么长的时期中，始终没有分裂，而是关系日益密切，这绝不是偶然的。根本原因在于，统一和分裂关系着藏族、汉族和国内其他民族的兴衰成败，合则共荣，分则两伤。西藏与中国其他部分始终结为一体，而不分裂，这是长时期历史所形成的必然结果。因此，企图把西藏从中国分裂出去，汉族和其他民族决不会答应，藏族人民也决不会答应。
No plot to split China will ever succeed. The close relations between the Tibetan people and other ethnic groups in China have lasted for several thousand years. And Tibet has been unified with other provinces and autonomous regions to make up a unitary country for seven centuries. In such a long period of time, Tibet's relations with other provinces and autonomous regions have become closer and closer, and there has never been separation. This is by no means fortuitous. The fundamental reason is that unity or separation has a decisive bearing on the prospering or decline of the Tibetan, the Han and all the other ethnic groups of China. Unity spells common prosperity, and separation would mean peril to both parties. The long-lasting unification of Tibet with other parts of China is the inevitable outcome of a long history. So the Han people and other ethnic groups absolutely will not accept separation of Tibet from China, nor will the Tibetan people themselves.

台湾问题与中国的统一
The Taiwan Question and Reunification of China 

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China
一九九三年八月·北京
August 1993, Beijing

目　录
Contents
前言
Foreword 
     台湾是中国不可分割的一部分 
Taiwan -- an Inalienable Part of China
     台湾问题的由来 
 Origin of the Taiwan Question
    中国政府解决台湾问题的基本方针
 The Chinese Government's Basic Position Regarding Settlement of the Taiwan Question
    台湾海峡两岸关系的发展及其阻力 
Relations Across Taiwan Straits: Evolution and Stumbling Blocks
    国际事务中涉及台湾的几个问题
 Several Questions Involving Taiwan in International Relations
结束语
Conclusion

前　言
Foreword
　　维护国家统一和领土完整，是每个主权国家的神圣权利，也是国际法的基本原则。联合国宪章明确规定：联合国和它的成员国不得侵害任何会员国或国家之领土完整或政治独立，不得干涉在本质上属于任何国家国内管辖的事件。联合国《关于各国依联合国宪章建立友好关系及合作之国际法原则之宣言》指出：凡以局部或全部破坏国家统一及领土完整或政治独立为目的之企图，都是不符合联合国宪章精神的。
It is the sacred right of each and every sovereign State and a fundamental principle of international law to safeguard national unity and territorial integrity. The Charter of the United Nations specifically stipulates that the United Nations and its Members shall refrain from any action against the territorial integrity or political independence of any of its Members or any State and shall not intervene in matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State. The United Nations Declaration on Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation Among States in Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations points out that any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity, territorial integrity or political independence of a State or country is incompatible with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
　　中国近代史是一部被侵略、被宰割、被凌辱的历史，也是中国人民为争取民族独立，维护国家主权、领土完整和民族尊严而英勇奋斗的历史。台湾问题的产生与发展，都与这段历史有着紧密的联系。由于种种原因，台湾迄今尚处于与大陆分离的状态。这种状态一天不结束，中华民族所蒙受的创伤就一天不能愈合，中国人民为维护国家统一和领土完整的斗争也一天不会结束。
The modern history of China was a record of subjection to aggression, dismemberment and humiliation by foreign powers. It was also a chronicle of the Chinese people's valiant struggles for national independence and in defense of their state sovereignty, territorial integrity and national dignity. The origin and evolution of the Taiwan question are closely linked with that period of history. For various reasons Taiwan is still separated from the mainland. Unless and until this state of affairs is brought to an end, the trauma on the Chinese nation will not be healed and the Chinese people's struggle for national reunification and territorial integrity will continue.
　　台湾问题的现状如何？症结何在？中国政府解决台湾问题的立场与主张是什么？为了便于国际社会有一个清楚的了解，有必要就下列问题加以阐述。
What is the present state of the Taiwan question? What is the crux of the problem? What are the position and views of the Chinese Government regarding the settlement of this issue? In order to facilitate a better understanding by the international community, it is necessary to elucidate the following points.
台湾是中国不可分割的一部分
Taiwan -- an Inalienable Part of China
　　台湾地处中国大陆的东南缘，是中国第一大岛，同大陆是不可分割的整体。
Lying off the southeastern coast of the China mainland, Taiwan is China's largest island and forms an integral whole with the mainland.
　　台湾自古即属于中国。台湾古称夷洲、流求。大量的史书和文献记载了中国人民早期开发台湾的情景。距今一千七百多年以前，三国时吴人沈莹的《临海水土志》等对此就有所著述，它们是世界上记述台湾最早的文字。公元三世纪和七世纪，三国孙吴政权和隋朝政府都曾先后派万余人去台。进入十七世纪之后，中国人民在台湾的开拓规模越来越大。十七世纪末，大陆赴台开拓者超过十万人。至公元一八九三年(清光绪十九年)时，总数达到五十点七万余户，二百五十四万余人。二百年间增长二十五倍。他们带去先进的生产方式，由南到北，由西及东，筚路蓝缕，披荆斩棘，大大加速了台湾整体开发的进程。这一史实说明，台湾和中国其他省区一样，同为中国各族人民所开拓所定居。台湾社会的发展始终延续着中华文化的传统，即使在日本侵占的五十年间，这一基本情况也没有改变。台湾的开拓发展史，凝聚了包括当地少数民族在内的中国人民的血汗和智慧。
Taiwan has belonged to China since ancient times. It was known as Yizhou or Liuqiu in antiquities. Many historical records and annals documented the development of Taiwan by the Chinese people in earlier periods. References to this effect were to be found, among others, in Seaboard Geographic Gazetteer compiled more than 1,700 years ago by Shen Ying of the State of Wu during the period of the Three Kingdoms. This was the world's earliest written account of Taiwan. Several expeditions, each numbering over ten thousand men, had been sent to Taiwan by the State of Wu (third century A.D.) and the Sui Dynasty (seventh century A.D.) respectively. Since early seventeenth century the Chinese people began to step up the development of Taiwan. Their numbers topped one hundred thousand at the end of the century. By 1893 (19th year of the reign of Qing Emperor Guangxu) their population exceeded 2.54 million people in 507,000 or more households. That was a 25-fold increase in 200 years. They brought in a more advanced mode of production and settled the whole length and breadth of Taiwan. Thanks to the determined efforts and hard toil of the pioneers, the development of the island as a whole greatly accelerated. This was the historical fact of how Taiwan, like the other parts of China, came to be opened up and settled by the Chinese people of various nationalities. From the very beginning the Taiwan society derived from the source of the Chinese cultural tradition. This basic fact had not changed even during the half century of Japanese occupation. The history of Taiwan's development is imbued with the blood, sweat, and ingenuity of the Chinese people including the local ethnic minorities.
　　中国历代政府在台湾先后建立了行政机构，行使管辖权。早在公元十二世纪中叶，宋朝政府即已派兵驻守澎湖，将澎湖地区划归福建泉州晋江县管辖。元朝政府在澎湖设置行政管理机构“巡检司”。明朝政府于十六世纪中后期，恢复了一度废止的“巡检司”，并为防御外敌侵犯，增兵澎湖。一六六二年(清康熙元年)，郑成功在台湾设“承天府”。清朝政府逐步在台湾扩增行政机构，加强了对台湾的治理。一六八四年(清康熙二十三年)设“分巡台厦兵备道”及“台湾府”，下设“台湾”(今台南)、“凤山”(今高雄)、“诸罗”(今嘉义)三县，隶属福建省管辖。一七一四年(清康熙五十三年)，清政府派员测绘台湾地图，勘丈全境里数。一七二一年(清康熙六十年)，增设“巡视台湾监察御史”，改“分巡台厦兵备道”为“分巡台厦道”。尔后又增设“彰化县”和“淡水厅”。一七二七年(清雍正五年)，复改“分巡台厦道”为“分巡台湾道”(后又改为“分巡台湾兵备道”)，增“澎湖厅”，定“台湾”为官方统一的名称。一八七五年(清光绪元年)，清政府为进一步经营和治理台湾，再增设“台北府”及“淡水”、“新竹”、“宜兰”三县和“基隆厅”。一八八五年(清光绪十一年)，清政府正式划台湾为单一行省，任刘铭传为首任巡抚，行政区扩为三府一州，领十一县五厅。刘在任内，铺铁路，开矿山，架电线，造商轮，兴办企业，创设新学堂，把台湾社会经济文化的发展大大向前推进。
Chinese governments of different periods set up administrative bodies to exercise jurisdiction over Taiwan. As early as in the mid-12th century the Song Dynasty set up a garrison in Penghu, putting the territory under the jurisdiction of Jinjiang County of Fujian's Quanzhou Prefecture. The Yuan Dynasty installed an agency of patrol and inspection in Penghu to administer the territory. During the mid- and late 16th century the Ming Dynasty reinstated the once abolished agency and sent reinforcements to Penghu in order to ward off foreign invaders. In 1662 (first year of the reign of Qing Emperor Kangxi) General Zheng Chenggong (known in the West as Koxinga) instituted Chengtian Prefecture on Taiwan. Subsequently, the Qing government expanded the administrative structure in Taiwan, thereby strengthening its rule over the territory. In 1684 (23rd year of the reign of Emperor Kangxi) a Taiwan-Xiamen Patrol Command and a Taiwan Prefecture Administration were set up under the jurisdiction of Fujian Province. These in turn exercised jurisdiction over three counties on the island: Taiwan (present-day Tainan), Fengshan (present-day Gaoxiong) and Zhuluo (present-day Jiayi). In 1714 (53rd year of the reign of Emperor Kangxi) the Qing government ordered the mapping of Taiwan to determine its size. In 1721 (60th year of the reign of Emperor Kangxi) an office of imperial supervisor of inspecting Taiwan was created and the Taiwan-Xiamen Patrol Command was renamed Prefecture Administration of Taiwan and Xiamen, incorporating the subsequently-created Zhanghua County and Danshui Canton. In 1727 (5th year of the reign of Emperor Yongzheng) the administration on the island was reconstituted as the Prefecture Administration of Taiwan (which was later renamed Prefecture Command for Patrol of Taiwan) and incorporated the new Penghu Canton. The territory then became officially known as Taiwan. In order to upgrade the administration of Taiwan, the Qing government created Taibei Prefecture, Jilong Canton and three counties of Danshui, Xinzhu and Yilan in 1875 (1st year of the reign of Emperor Guangxu). In 1885 (11th year of the reign of Emperor Guangxu), the government formally made Taiwan a full province covering three prefectures and one subprefecture and incorporating 11 counties and 5 cantons. Liu Mingchuan was appointed first Governor of Taiwan. During his tenure of office, railways were laid, mines opened, telegraph service installed, merchant ships built, industries started and new-style schools set up. Considerable social, economic and cultural advancement in Taiwan was achieved as a result.
　　一九四五年中国人民抗日战争胜利后，中国政府重新恢复了台湾省的行政管理机构。
After the Chinese people's victory in the war against Japanese aggression in 1945, the Chinese government reinstated its administrative authority in Taiwan Province.
　　海峡两岸中国人为反对外国侵占台湾进行了长期不懈的斗争。十五世纪后期起，西方殖民主义者大肆掠夺殖民地。一六二四年(明天启四年)，荷兰殖民者侵占台湾南部。一六二六年(明天启六年)，西班牙殖民者入侵台湾北部。一六四二年(明崇祯十五年)，荷兰又取代西班牙占领台湾北部。两岸同胞为反对外国殖民者侵占台湾进行了包括武装起义在内的各种方式的斗争。一六六一年(清顺治十八年)，郑成功率众进军台湾，于次年驱逐了盘踞台湾的荷兰殖民者。
Chinese on both sides of the Taiwan Straits carried out a prolonged, unremitting struggle against foreign invasion and occupation of Taiwan. Since the late 15th century Western colonialists started to grab and conquer colonies in a big way. In 1624 (4th year of the reign of Ming Emperor Tianqi) Dutch colonialists invaded and occupied the southern part of Taiwan. Two years later Spanish colonialists seized the northern part of Taiwan. In 1642 (15th year of the reign of Ming Emperor Chongzhen) the Dutch evicted the Spaniards and took over north Taiwan. The Chinese people on both sides of the Straits waged various forms of struggle including armed insurrections against the invasion and occupation of Taiwan by foreign colonialists. In 1661 (18th year of the reign of Qing Emperor Shunzhi) General Zheng Chenggong (Koxinga) led an expedition to Taiwan and expelled the Dutch colonialists from the island in the following year.
　　一八九四年(清光绪二十年)，日本发动侵略中国的“甲午战争”。翌年，清政府战败，在日本威迫下签订丧权辱国的《马关条约》，割让台湾。消息传来，举国同愤。在北京会试的包括台湾在内的十八省千余举人“公车上书”，反对割台。台湾全省“哭声震天”，呜锣罢市。协理台湾军务的清军将领刘永福等和台湾同胞一起，与占领台湾的日军拼死搏斗。中国大陆东南各地居民为支援这一斗争，或捐输饷银，或结队赴台，反抗日本侵略。在日本侵占台湾期间，台湾同胞一直坚持英勇不屈的斗争。初期，他们组织义军，进行武装游击抵抗，前后达七年之久。继而，在辛亥革命推翻清政府后，他们又汇同大陆同胞一道，先后发起十余次武装起义。及至本世纪二十和三十年代，岛内反抗日本殖民统治的群众运动更加波澜壮阔，席卷台湾南北。
Japan launched a war of aggression against China in 1894 (20th year of the reign of Qing Emperor Guangxu). In the ensuing year, as a result of defeat the Qing government was forced to sign the Treaty of Shimonoseki, ceding Taiwan to Japan. This wanton betrayal and humiliation shocked the whole nation and touched off a storm of protests. A thousand or more candidates from all 18 provinces including Taiwan who had assembled in Beijing for the Imperial Examination signed a strongly-worded petition opposing the ceding of Taiwan. In Taiwan itself, people wailed and bemoaned the betrayal and went on general strikes. General Liu Yongfu and others of the garrison command stood with Taiwan compatriots and put up a fierce fight against the Japanese landing forces. To support this struggle, people on the mainland, particularly in the southeastern region, showed their solidarity by generous donations or organizing volunteers to Taiwan to fight the Japanese forces. Taiwan compatriots never ceased their dauntless struggle throughout the Japanese occupation. Initially, they formed insurgent groups to wage guerrilla warfare for as long as seven years. When the Revolution of 1911 overthrew the Qing monarchy they in turn lent support to their mainland compatriots by staging more than a dozen armed insurrections. The 1920s and 1930s witnessed surging waves of mass action sweeping across the island against Japanese colonial rule.
　　一九三七年，中国人民开始了全民族的抗日战争。中国政府在《中国对日宣战布告》中明确昭告中外：所有一切条约、协定、合同有涉及中日关系者，一律废止。《马关条约》自属废止之列。这一布告并郑重宣布：中国将“收复台湾、澎湖、东北四省土地”。中国人民经过八年艰苦的抗日战争，于一九四五年取得了最后的胜利，收复了失土台湾。台湾同胞鸣放鞭炮，欢欣鼓舞，祭告祖先，庆祝回归祖国怀抱的伟大胜利。
In 1937 the Chinese people threw themselves into an all-out war of resistance against Japanese aggression. In its declaration of war against Japan, the Chinese Government proclaimed that all treaties, conventions, agreements, and contracts regarding relations between China and Japan, including the Treaty of Shimonoseki, had been abrogated. The declaration stressed that China would recover Taiwan, Penghu and the four northeastern provinces. After eight years of grueling war against Japanese aggression the Chinese people won final victory and recovered the lost territory of Taiwan in 1945. Taiwan compatriots displayed an outburst of passion and celebrated the great triumph of their return to the fold of the motherland by setting off big bangs of fireworks and performing rites to communicate the event to their ancestors.
　　国际社会公认台湾属于中国。中国人民的抗日战争是世界反法西斯斗争的一部分，得到了世界人民的广泛支持。在第二次世界大战中，为了反对德、日、意法西斯轴心国，中国与美国、苏联、英国、法国等结成同盟国。一九四三年十二月一日，中、美、英三国签署的《开罗宣言》指出：“三国之宗旨，在剥夺日本自一九一四年第一次世界大战开始以后在太平洋所夺得或占领之一切岛屿，在使日本所窃取于中国之土地，例如满洲、台湾、澎湖列岛等，归还中国。”一九四五年七月二十六日，中、美、英三国签署(后苏联参加)的《波茨坦公告》又重申：“开罗宣言之条件必将实施。”同年八月十五日，日本宣布投降，《日本投降条款》规定：“兹接受中美英三国共同签署的、后来又有苏联参加的一九四五年七月二十六日的波茨坦公告中的条款。”十月二十五日，同盟国中国战区台湾省受降仪式于台北举行，受降主官代表中国政府宣告：自即日起，台湾及澎湖列岛已正式重入中国版图，所有一切土地、人民、政事皆已置于中国主权之下。至此，台湾、澎湖重归于中国主权管辖之下。
The international community has acknowledged the fact that Taiwan belongs to China. The Chinese people's war of resistance against Japanese aggression, being part of the world-wide struggle against Fascism, received extensive support from people all over the world. During the Second World War China, the United States, the Soviet Union, Great Britain, France and others formed an alliance to oppose the Axis of Germany, Japan and Italy. The Cairo Declaration issued by China, the United States and Great Britain on 1 December 1943 stated: "It is the purpose of the three great Allies that Japan shall be stripped of all the islands in the Pacific which she has seized or occupied since the beginning of the First World War in 1914, and that all the territories Japan has stolen from the Chinese, such as Manchuria, Formosa [Taiwan] and the Pescadores [Penghu], shall be restored to China." The Potsdam Proclamation signed by China, the United States and Great Britain on 26 July 1945 (subsequently adhered to by the Soviet Union) reiterated: "The terms of the Cairo Declaration shall be carried out." On 15 August of the same year, Japan declared surrender. The instrument of Japan's surrender stipulated that "Japan hereby accepts the provisions in the declaration issued by the heads of the Governments of the United States, China and Great Britain on July 26, 1945 at Potsdam, and subsequently adhered to by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics." On 25 October the ceremony for accepting Japan's surrender in Taiwan Province of the China war theater of the Allied powers was held in Taibei. On the occasion the chief officer for accepting the surrender proclaimed on behalf of the Chinese government that from that day forward Taiwan and the Penghu Archipelago had again been incorporated formally into the territory of China and that the territory, people, and administration had now been placed under the sovereignty of China. From that point in time forward, Taiwan and Penghu had been put back under the jurisdiction of Chinese sovereignty.
　　中华人民共和国成立以来，一百五十七个国家先后同中国建立了外交关系，它们都承认只有一个中国，中华人民共和国政府是中国的唯一合法政府，台湾是中国的一部分。
Since the founding of the People's Republic of China, 157 countries have established diplomatic relations with China. All these countries recognize that there is only one China and that the Government of the People's Republic of China is the sole legal government of China and Taiwan is part of China.
台湾问题的由来
 Origin of the Taiwan Question
　　台湾在第二次世界大战之后，不仅在法律上而且在事实上已归还中国。之所以又出现台湾问题，与随后中国国民党发动的反人民内战有关，但更重要的是外国势力的介入。
Taiwan was returned to China de jure and de facto at the end of the Second World War. It became an issue only as an aftermath of the ensuing anti-popular civil war started by Kuomintang, and more especially because of intervention by foreign forces.
　　台湾问题与国民党发动的内战。中国抗日战争期间，在中国共产党和其他爱国力量的推动下，中国国民党与中国共产党建立了抗日民族统一战线，抗击日本帝国主义的侵略。抗日战争胜利后，两党本应继续携手，共肩振兴中华大业，惟当时以蒋介石为首的国民党集团依仗美国的支持，置全国人民渴望和平与建设独立、民主、富强的新中国的强烈愿望于不顾，撕毁国共两党签订的《双十协定》，发动了全国规模的反人民内战。中国人民在中国共产党领导下被迫进行了三年多的人民解放战争，由于当时的国民党集团倒行逆施，已为全国各族人民所唾弃，中国人民终于推翻了南京的“中华民国”政府。一九四九年十月一日成立了中华人民共和国，中华人民共和国政府成为中国的唯一合法政府。国民党集团的一部分军政人员退据台湾。他们在当时美国政府的支持下，造成了台湾海峡两岸隔绝的状态。
Taiwan question and civil war launched by Kuomintang. During the war of resistance against Japanese aggression the Chinese Communist Party and other patriotic groups pressed Kuomintang into a national united front with the Communist Party to fight Japanese imperialist aggression. After victory of the war the two Parties should have joined hands to work for the resurgence of China. But the Kuomintang clique headed by Chiang Kaishek flouted the people's fervent aspirations for peace and for building an independent, democratic and prosperous new China. Relying on U.S. support, this clique tore up the 10 October 1945 agreement between the two Parties and launched an all-out anti-popular civil war. The Chinese people were compelled to respond with a people's liberation war which was to last more than three years under the leadership of the Communist Party. Since the Kuomintang clique had already been spurned by the people of all nationalities for its reign of terror, the government of the "Republic of China" in Nanjing was finally overthrown by the Chinese people. The People's Republic of China was proclaimed on 1 October 1949 and the Government of the new People's Republic became the sole legal government of China. A group of military and political officials of the Kuomintang clique took refuge in Taiwan and, with the support of the then U.S. administration, created the division between the two sides of the Straits.
　　台湾问题与美国政府的责任。第二次世界大战后，在当时东西方两大阵营对峙的态势下，美国政府基于它的所谓全球战略及维护本国利益的考虑，曾经不遗余力地出钱、出枪、出人，支持国民党集团打内战，阻挠中国人民革命的事业。然而，美国政府最终并未达到它自己所希望达到的目的。美国国务院一九四九年发表的《美国与中国的关系》白皮书和艾奇逊国务卿给杜鲁门总统的信，都不得不承认这一点。艾奇逊在他的信中说：“中国内战不祥的结局超出美国政府控制的能力，这是不幸的事，却也是无可避免的”；“这种结局之所以终于发生，也并不是因为我们少做了某些事情。这是中国内部各种力量的产物，我国曾经设法去左右这些力量，但是没有效果”。
Taiwan question and responsibility of the United States. Against the backdrop of East-West confrontation in the wake of the Second World War and guided by its conceived global strategy and national interest considerations, the U.S. government gave full support to the Kuomintang, providing it with money, weapons and advisors to carry on the civil war and block the advance of the Chinese people's revolution. However, the U.S. government never achieved its objective. The White Paper on United States Relations with China released by the Department of State in 1949 and Secretary of State Dean Acheson's letter of transmittal to President Harry S. Truman had to admit this. Dean Acheson lamented in his letter: "The unfortunate but inescapable fact is that the ominous result of the civil war in China was beyond the control of the government of the United States. ... Nothing that was left undone by this country has contributed to it. It was the product of internal Chinese forces, forces which this country tried to influence but could not."
　　中华人民共和国诞生以后，当时的美国政府本来可以从中国内战的泥潭中拔出来，但是它没有这样做，而是对新中国采取了孤立、遏制的政策，并且在朝鲜战争爆发后武装干涉纯属中国内政的海峡两岸关系。一九五○年六月二十七日，美国总统杜鲁门发表声明宣布：“我已命令第七舰队阻止对台湾的任何攻击”。美国第七舰队侵入了台湾海峡，美国第十三航空队进驻了台湾。一九五四年十二月，美国又与台湾当局签订了所谓《共同防御条约》，将中国的台湾省置于美国的“保护”之下。美国政府继续干预中国内政的错误政策，造成了台湾海峡地区长期的紧张对峙局势，台湾问题自此亦成为中美两国间的重大争端。
At the time of the founding of the People's Republic of China the then U.S. administration could have pulled itself from the quagmire of China's civil war. But it failed to do so. Instead, it adopted a policy of isolation and containment of New China. When the Korean War broke out, it started armed intervention in the inter-Taiwan Straits relations which were entirely China's internal affairs. On 27 June 1950 President Truman announced: "I have ordered the Seventh Fleet to prevent any attack on Formosa." Thus the Seventh Fleet invaded the Taiwan Straits and the U.S. 13th Air Force set up base in Taiwan. In December 1954 the U.S. concluded with the Taiwan authorities a so-called mutual defense treaty placing China's Taiwan Province under U.S. "protection". The erroneous policy of the U.S. government of continued interference in China's internal affairs led to prolonged and intense confrontation in the Taiwan Straits area and henceforth the Taiwan question became a major dispute between China and the United States.
　　为了缓和台湾海峡地区的紧张局势，探寻解决中美两国之间争端的途径，中国政府自五十年代中期起，即开始与美国对话。一九五五年八月至一九七○年二月，中美两国共举行了一百三十六次大使级会谈，但在缓和与消除台湾海峡地区紧张局势这个关键问题上，未取得任何进展。及至六十年代末七十年代初，随着国际局势的发展变化和新中国的壮大，美国开始调整其对华政策，两国关系逐步出现解冻的形势。一九七一年十月，第二十六届联合国大会通过二七五八号决议，恢复中华人民共和国在联合国的一切合法权利，并驱逐台湾当局的“代表”。一九七二年二月，美国总统尼克松访问中国，中美双方在上海发表了联合公报。公报称：“美国方面声明：美国认识到，在台湾海峡两边的所有中国人都认为只有一个中国，台湾是中国的一部分。美国政府对这一立场不提出异议”。
In order to ease tension in the Taiwan Straits area and seek ways of solving the dispute between the two countries, the Chinese Government started dialogues with the United States from the mid-1950s onwards. The two countries held 136 sessions of talks at ambassadorial level from August 1955 to February 1970. However, no progress had been made in that period on the key issue of easing and removing tension in the Taiwan Straits area. It was not until late 1960s and early 1970s when the international situation had undergone changes and as New China had gained in strength that the U.S. began to readjust its China policy and the relations between the two countries started a thawing. In October 1971 the United Nations General Assembly adopted at its 26th session Resolution 2758 which restored all the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations and expelled the "representatives" of the Taiwan authorities from the U.N. U.S. President Richard Nixon visited China in February 1972 in the course of which the two countries issued a joint communiqu'e?? in Shanghai stating that: "The U.S. side declared: the United States acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Strait maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a part of China. The United States Government does not challenge that position."
　　一九七八年十二月，美国政府接受了中国政府提出的建交三原则，即：美国与台湾当局“断交”、废除《共同防御条约》以及从台湾撤军。中美两国于一九七九年一月一日正式建立外交关系。中美建交联合公报声明：“美利坚合众国承认中华人民共和国政府是中国的唯一合法政府。在此范围内，美国人民将同台湾人民保持文化、商务和其他非官方联系”；“美利坚合众国政府承认中国的立场，即只有一个中国，台湾是中国的一部分”。自此，中美关系实现正常化。
In December 1978 the U.S. Government accepted the three principles proposed by the Chinese Government for the establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries, namely, the United States should sever "diplomatic relations" and abrogate the "mutual defense treaty" with the Taiwan authorities and withdraw U.S. military forces from Taiwan. On 1 January 1979 China and the United States formally established diplomatic relations. The Communiqu'e on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations said that: "The United States of America recognizes the Government of the People's Republic of China as the sole legal government of China. Within this context, the people of the United States will maintain cultural, commercial and other unofficial relations with the people of Taiwan ... ... The Government of the United States of America acknowledges the Chinese position that there is but one China and Taiwan is part of China." Normalization of Sino-U.S. relations was thus achieved.
　　但遗憾的是，中美建交不过三个月，美国国会竟通过了所谓《与台湾关系法》，并经美国总统签署生效。这个《与台湾关系法》，以美国国内立法的形式，作出了许多违反中美建交公报和国际法原则的规定，严重损害中国人民的权益。美国政府根据这个关系法，继续向台湾出售武器和干涉中国内政，阻挠台湾与中国大陆的统一。
Regrettably, however, scarcely three months after the event, a so-called Taiwan Relations Act was passed by the U.S. Congress and signed into law by the President. A domestic legislation of the U.S. as it was, this Act contained many clauses that contravened the communiqu'e? on the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and the U.S. and the principles of international law, and seriously prejudiced the rights and interests of the Chinese people. Invoking this legislation, the U.S. Government has continued its arms sales to Taiwan, interference in China's internal affairs and obstruction to Taiwan's reunification with the mainland.
　　为解决美国售台武器问题，中美两国政府通过谈判，于一九八二年八月十七日达成协议，发表了有关中美关系的第三个联合公报，简称“八·一七公报”。美国政府在公报中声明：“它不寻求执行一项长期向台湾出售武器的政策，它向台湾出售的武器在性能和数量上将不超过中美建交后近几年供应的水平，它准备逐步减少它对台湾的武器出售，并经过一段时间导致最后的解决。”然而，十多年来美国政府不但没有认真执行公报的规定，而且不断发生违反公报的行为。一九九二年九月，美国政府甚至决定向台湾出售一百五十架F-16型高性能战斗机。美国政府的这一行动，给中美关系的发展和台湾问题的解决增加了新的障碍和阻力。
In order to resolve the issue of U.S. arms sales to Taiwan, the Chinese and the U.S. governments negotiated and reached an agreement on 17 August 1982. A communique? bearing the same date became the third joint communique? governing Sino-U.S. relations. In that communique? the U.S. Government stated that: "It does not seek to carry out a long-term policy of arms sales to Taiwan, that its arms sales to Taiwan will not exceed, either in qualitative or in quantitative terms, the level of those supplied in recent years since the establishment of diplomatic relations between the United States and China and that it intends gradually to reduce its sale of arms to Taiwan, leading, over a period of time, to a final resolution." Yet in the past dozen or more years the U.S. Government has not only failed to implement the communiqu'e? in earnest, but has repeatedly contravened it. In September 1992 the U.S. Government even decided to sell 150 F-16 high-performance fighter aircraft to Taiwan. This action of the U.S. Government has added a new stumbling block in the way of the development of Sino-U.S. relations and settlement of the Taiwan question.
　　由上可见，台湾问题直到现在还未得到解决，美国政府是有责任的。自七十年代以来，美国朝野许多有识之士和友好人士，曾经为促使中美之间在台湾问题上的分歧的解决做了大量有益的工作，上述三个联合公报就包含着他们的努力和贡献。中国政府和人民对此十分赞赏。然而也不能不看到，美国确也有人至今仍不愿看到中国的统一，制造种种借口，施加种种影响，阻挠台湾问题的解决。
It is clear from the foregoing that the U.S. Government is responsible for holding up the settlement of the Taiwan question. Since the 1970s many Americans of vision and goodwill in or outside the administration have contributed much by way of helping to resolve the differences between China and the U.S. on the Taiwan question. The aforesaid three joint communiqu'e?s testify to their effort and contribution of which the Chinese Government and people are highly appreciative. On the other hand, one cannot fail to note that there are people in the U.S. who still do not want to see a reunified China. They have cooked up various pretexts and exerted influence to obstruct the settlement of the Taiwan question.
　　中国政府相信，美国人民与中国人民是友好的。两国关系的正常发展，是符合两国人民的长远利益和共同愿望的。中美两国都应珍视来之不易的指导两国关系发展的三个联合公报。只要双方都能恪守三个公报的原则，相互尊重，以大局为重，历史遗留下来的台湾问题就不难得到解决，中美关系就一定能不断获得改善和发展。
The Chinese Government is convinced that the American and the Chinese peoples are friendly to each other and that the normal development of the relations between the two countries accords with the long-term interests and common aspiration of both peoples. Both countries should cherish the three hard-won joint communiqu'e?s guiding the development of bilateral relations. As long as both sides abide by the principles enshrined in those communique?s, respect each other and set store by their overall common interests, it will not be difficult to settle the Taiwan question that has been left over from history and Sino-U.S. relations will surely see steady improvement and development ahead.
中国政府解决台湾问题的基本方针
 The Chinese Government's Basic Position Regarding Settlement of the Taiwan Question
　　解决台湾问题，实现国家统一，是全体中国人民一项庄严而神圣的使命。中华人民共和国成立后，中国政府为之进行了长期不懈的努力。中国政府解决台湾问题的基本方针是“和平统一、一国两制”。
To settle the Taiwan question and achieve national reunification -- this is a sacrosanct mission of the entire Chinese people. The Chinese Government has persistently worked towards this end since the founding of the People's Republic. Its basic position on this question is: peaceful reunification; one country, two systems.
　　“和平统一、一国两制”方针的形成。早在五十年代，中国政府就曾设想以和平方式解决台湾问题。一九五五年五月，周恩来总理在全国人民代表大会常务委员会会议上即提出：中国人民解决台湾问题有两种可能的方式，即战争的方式和和平的方式，中国人民愿意在可能的条件下，争取用和平的方式解决问题。一九五六年四月，毛泽东主席又提出：“和为贵”、“爱国一家”、“爱国不分先后”等政策主张。但由于某些外国势力的干预等原因，这些主张未能付诸实践。
Peaceful reunification; one country, two systems -- how has this position been formulated? The Chinese Government conceived a peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question as early as in the 1950s. In May 1955 the late Premier Zhou Enlai said at a NPC Standing Committee meeting that two alternatives were open to the Chinese people for the solution of the Taiwan question -- by resort to war or by peaceful means. The Chinese people would strive for a peaceful solution wherever possible, he affirmed. In April 1956 the late Chairman Mao Zedong put forward thoughts for policymaking such as "peace is the best option", "all patriots are of one family" and "it is never too late to join the ranks of patriots". However, those wishes have not come to fruition for reasons such as interference by foreign forces.
　　自七十年代末开始，国际国内形势发生了一些重要变化：中美建立外交关系，实现了关系正常化；中国共产党召开十一届三中全会，决定把党和国家的工作中心转移到现代化经济建设上来。与此同时，海峡两岸的中国人、港澳同胞以及海外侨胞、华人，都殷切期望两岸携手合作，共同振兴中华。在这样的历史条件下，中国政府出于对整个国家民族利益与前途的考虑，本着尊重历史、尊重现实、实事求是、照顾各方利益的原则，提出了“和平统一、一国两制”的方针。
Major changes took place in and outside China in the 1970s. Diplomatic ties were established and relations normalized between China and the United States. The Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee of the Communist Party of China decided to shift the focus of the work of the Party and the State to the economic modernization programme. In the meantime, people on both sides of the Taiwan Straits, compatriots of Hong Kong and Macao as well as overseas Chinese and people of Chinese descent all expressed their fervent hope that the two sides of the Straits would join hands to work for a resurgence of China. It was against this historical background that the Chinese Government formulated the position of "peaceful reunification; one country, two systems". The position takes the overall national interests and the future of the country into consideration. It respects history as well as the prevailing situation. It is realistic and takes care of the interests of all.
　　一九七九年一月一日，中华人民共和国全国人民代表大会常务委员会发表《告台湾同胞书》，郑重宣告了中国政府和平解决台湾问题的大政方针，呼吁两岸就结束军事对峙状态进行商谈。表示在实现国家统一时，一定“尊重台湾现状和台湾各界人士的意见，采取合情合理的政策和办法”。
On 1 January 1979 the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China issued a message to compatriots in Taiwan, pronouncing the Chinese Government's basic position regarding peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question. It called for the holding of talks between the two sides of the Straits to seek an end to the military confrontation. It pledged that in the pursuit of national reunification, the Government "will respect the status quo on Taiwan and the views of people of all walks of life there and adopt reasonable policies and measures".
　　一九八一年九月三十日，全国人民代表大会常务委员会委员长叶剑英发表谈话，进一步阐明解决台湾问题的方针政策。表示“国家实现统一后，台湾可作为特别行政区，享有高度的自治权”，并建议由两岸执政的国共两党举行对等谈判。
In a statement on 30 September 1981 the late Chairman Ye Jianying of the NPC Standing Committee further elaborated the policy and principles for the settlement of the Taiwan question. He affirmed that "after the country is reunified, Taiwan can enjoy a high degree of autonomy as a special administrative region" and proposed that talks be held on an equal footing between the ruling Parties on each side of the Straits, namely, the Chinese Communist Party and the Kuomintang.
　　一九八二年一月十一日，中国领导人邓小平就叶剑英的上述谈话指出：这实际上就是“一个国家、两种制度”，在国家实现统一的大前提下，国家主体实行社会主义制度，台湾实行资本主义制度。
Referring to Ye Jianying's remarks, Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping pointed out on 11 January 1982 that this in effect meant "one country, two systems", i.e., on the premise of national reunification, the main body of the nation would continue with its socialist system while Taiwan could maintain capitalism.
　　一九八三年六月二十六日，邓小平进一步发挥了关于实现台湾与大陆和平统一的构想，指出，问题的核心是祖国统一。他还就两岸统一和设置台湾特别行政区问题，阐明了中国政府的政策。
On 26 June 1983 Deng Xiaoping further enunciated the concept of peaceful reunification, stressing that the crucial point was national reunification. He went on to expound the Government's policy on reunification and on the creation of a Taiwan special administrative region.
　　一九九二年十月十二日，中共中央总书记江泽民指出：“我们坚定不移地按照‘和平统一、一国两制’的方针，积极促进祖国统一。”“我们再次重申，中国共产党愿意同中国国民党尽早接触，以便创造条件，就正式结束两岸敌对状态、逐步实现和平统一进行谈判。在商谈中，可以吸收两岸其他政党、团体和各界有代表性的人士参加。”
On 12 October 1992 General Secretary Jiang Zemin of the CPC Central Committee pointed out: "We shall work steadfastly for the great cause, adhering to the principles of peaceful reunification and 'one country, two systems' ... ... We reiterate that the Chinese Communist Party is ready to establish contact with the Chinese Kuomintang at the earliest possible date to create conditions for talks on officially ending the state of hostility between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits and gradually realizing peaceful reunification. Representatives from other parties, mass organizations and all circles on both sides of the Taiwan Straits could be invited to join in such talks."
　　“和平统一、一国两制”的基本点。“和平统一、一国两制”是建设有中国特色的社会主义理论和实践的重要组成部分，是中国政府一项长期不变的基本国策。这一方针，有以下基本点：
Basic Contents of "peaceful reunification; one country, two systems". This position is an important component of the theory and practice of building socialism with Chinese characteristics and a fundamental state policy of the Chinese Government which will not change for a long time to come. Its basic contents are as follows:
　　(一)一个中国。世界上只有一个中国，台湾是中国不可分割的一部分，中央政府在北京。这是举世公认的事实，也是和平解决台湾问题的前提。
1. Only one China. There is only one China in the world, Taiwan is an inalienable part of China and the seat of China's central government is in Beijing. This is a universally recognized fact as well as the premise for a peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question.
　　中国政府坚决反对任何旨在分裂中国主权和领土完整的言行，反对“两个中国”、“一中一台”或“一国两府”，反对一切可能导致“台湾独立”的企图和行径。海峡两岸的中国人民都主张只有一个中国，都拥护国家的统一，台湾作为中国不可分割的一部分的地位是确定的、不能改变的，不存在什么“自决”的问题。
The Chinese Government is firmly against any words or deeds designed to split China's sovereignty and territorial integrity. It opposes "two Chinas", "one China, one Taiwan", "one country, two governments" or any attempt or act that could lead to "independence of Taiwan". The Chinese people on both sides of the Straits all believe that there is only one China and espouse national reunification. Taiwan's status as an inalienable part of China has been determined and cannot be changed. "Self- determination" for Taiwan is out of the question.
　　(二)两制并存。在一个中国的前提下，大陆的社会主义制度和台湾的资本主义制度，实行长期共存，共同发展，谁也不吃掉谁。这种考虑，主要是基于照顾台湾的现状和台湾同胞的实际利益。这将是统一后的中国国家体制的一大特色和重要创造。
2. Coexistence of two systems. On the premise of one China, socialism on the mainland and capitalism on Taiwan can coexist and develop side by side for a long time without one swallowing up the other. This concept has largely taken account of the actual situation in Taiwan and practical interests of our compatriots there. It will be a unique feature and important innovation in the state system of a reunified China.
　　两岸实现统一后，台湾的现行社会经济制度不变，生活方式不变，同外国的经济文化关系不变。诸如私人财产、房屋、土地、企业所有权、合法继承权、华侨和外国人投资等，一律受法律保护。
After reunification, Taiwan's current socio-economic system, its way of life as well as economic and cultural ties with foreign countries can remain unchanged. Private property, including houses and land, as well as business ownership, legal inheritance and overseas Chinese and foreign investments on the island will all be protected by law.
　　(三)高度自治。统一后，台湾将成为特别行政区。它不同于中国其他一般省区，享有高度的自治权。它拥有在台湾的行政管理权、立法权、独立的司法权和终审权；党、政、军、经、财等事宜都自行管理；可以同外国签订商务、文化等协定，享有一定的外事权；有自己的军队，大陆不派军队也不派行政人员驻台。特别行政区政府和台湾各界的代表人士还可以出任国家政权机构的领导职务，参与全国事务的管理。
3. A high degree of autonomy. After reunification, Taiwan will become a special administrative region. It will be distinguished from the other provinces or regions of China by its high degree of autonomy. It will have its own administrative and legislative powers, an independent judiciary and the right of adjudication on the island. It will run its own party, political, military, economic and financial affairs. It may conclude commercial and cultural agreements with foreign countries and enjoy certain rights in foreign affairs. It may keep its military forces and the mainland will not dispatch troops or administrative personnel to the island. On the other hand, representatives of the government of the special administrative region and those from different circles of Taiwan may be appointed to senior posts in the central government and participate in the running of national affairs.
　　(四)和平谈判。通过接触谈判，以和平方式实现国家统一，是全体中国人的共同心愿。两岸都是中国人，如果因为中国的主权和领土完整被分裂，兵戎相见，骨肉相残，对两岸的同胞都是极其不幸的。和平统一，有利于全民族的大团结，有利于台湾社会经济的稳定和发展，有利于全中国的振兴和富强。
4. Peace negotiations. It is the common aspiration of the entire Chinese people to achieve reunification of the country by peaceful means through contacts and negotiations. People on both sides of the Straits are all Chinese. It would be a great tragedy for all if China's territorial integrity and sovereignty were to be split and its people were to be drawn into a fratricide. Peaceful reunification will greatly enhance the cohesion of the Chinese nation. It will facilitate Taiwan's socio-economic stability and development and promote the resurgence and prosperity of China as a whole.
　　为结束敌对状态，实现和平统一，两岸应尽早接触谈判。在一个中国的前提下，什么问题都可以谈，包括谈判的方式，参加的党派、团体和各界代表人士，以及台湾方面关心的其他一切问题。只要两岸坐下来谈，总能找到双方都可以接受的办法。
In order to put an end to hostility and achieve peaceful reunification, the two sides should enter into contacts and negotiations at the earliest possible date. On the premise of one China, both sides can discuss any subject, including the modality of negotiations, the question of what Parties, groups and personalities may participate as well as any other matters of concern to the Taiwan side. So long as the two sides sit down and talk, they will always be able to find a mutually acceptable solution.
　　鉴于两岸的现实状况，中国政府主张在实现统一之前，双方按照相互尊重、互补互利的原则，积极推动两岸经济合作和各项交往，进行直接通邮、通商、通航和双向交流，为国家和平统一创造条件。
Taking into account the prevailing situation on both sides of the Straits, the Chinese Government has proposed that pending reunification the two sides should, according to the principle of mutual respect, complementarity and mutual benefit, actively promote economic cooperation and other exchanges. Direct trade, postal, air and shipping services and two-way visits should be started in order to pave the way for the peaceful reunification of the country.
　　和平统一是中国政府既定的方针。然而，每一个主权国家都有权采取自己认为必要的一切手段包括军事手段，来维护本国主权和领土的完整。中国政府在采取何种方式处理本国内部事务的问题上，并无义务对任何外国或图谋分裂中国者作出承诺。
Peaceful reunification is a set policy of the Chinese Government. However, any sovereign state is entitled to use any means it deems necessary, including military ones, to uphold its sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Chinese Government is under no obligation to undertake any commitment to any foreign power or people intending to split China as to what means it might use to handle its own domestic affairs.
　　这里还应指出，台湾问题纯属中国的内政，不同于第二次世界大战后经国际协议而形成的德国问题和朝鲜问题。因此，台湾问题不能和德国、朝鲜问题相提并论。中国政府历来反对用处理德国问题、朝鲜问题的方式来处理台湾问题。台湾问题应该也完全可以通过两岸的协商，在一个中国的架构内求得合理的解决。
It should be pointed out that the Taiwan question is purely an internal affair of China and bears no analogy to the cases of Germany and Korea which were brought about as a result of international accords at the end of the Second World War. Therefore, the Taiwan question should not be placed on a par with the situation of Germany or Korea. The Chinese Government has always opposed applying the German or Korean formulas to Taiwan. The Taiwan question should and entirely can be resolved judiciously through bilateral consultations and within the framework of one China.
台湾海峡两岸关系的发展及其阻力
 Relations Across Taiwan Straits: Evolution and Stumbling Blocks
　　台湾海峡两岸目前的分离状态，是中华民族的不幸。所有中国人无不殷切盼望早日结束这种令人痛心的局面。
The present division between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits is a misfortune for the Chinese nation. All the Chinese people are yearning for an early end to this agonizing situation.
　　为了实现两岸人民正常往来和国家统一，中国政府在提出和平统一主张的同时，也采取了一系列推动两岸关系发展的措施：
In order to enable normal movement of people across the Straits and to achieve reunification of the country, the Chinese Government has made proposals towards this end and, at the same time, adopted measures to step up the development of inter-Straits relations.
　　政治方面，调整有关政策措施，化解敌对情绪。最高人民法院、最高人民检察院决定不再追诉去台人员在中华人民共和国成立前的犯罪行为。
On the political plane, policy adjustments have been made with a view to breaking down the mentality of hostility. The Supreme People's Court and the Supreme People's Procuratorate have decided respectively that people who had gone to Taiwan would no longer be prosecuted for offenses prior to the founding of the People's Republic of China.
　　军事方面，主动缓和海峡两岸军事对峙状态，停止对金门等岛屿的炮击，并把福建沿海一些前沿阵地、观察所开辟为经济开发区和旅游点。
On the military plane, initiatives have been taken to ease military confrontation across the Straits. Shelling of Jinmen and other islands have been discontinued. Some forward defense positions and observation posts along the Fujian coast have been transformed into economic development zones or tourist attractions.
　　经济方面，敞开门户，促进交流，欢迎台商来大陆投资和从事贸易活动，并为之提供优惠条件和法律保障。
On the economic plane, doors have been flung open to facilitate the flow of goods and people. Businessmen from Taiwan are welcome to invest or trade on the mainland. They are accorded preferential treatment and legal safeguards.
　　其他如人员往来、邮电交通以及科技、文化、体育、学术、新闻等方面，中国政府亦持积极态度，采取了相应措施，鼓励发展两岸在各个领域的交流与合作。还成立了得到政府授权的民间团体“海峡两岸关系协会”，同台湾“海峡交流基金会”及有关民间团体建立联系，维护两岸人民的合法权益，推动两岸关系的发展。
The Chinese Government has also adopted a positive attitude and taken measures to encourage bilateral exchanges and cooperation in areas such as two-way travels, post and communications as well as scientific, cultural, sports, academic and journalistic activities. A non-governmental Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits has been set up and authorized by the Government to liaise with the Straits Exchange Foundation and other relevant non-governmental bodies in Taiwan for the purpose of upholding the legitimate rights and interests of people on both sides and promoting inter-Straits relations.
　　中国政府的对台政策和措施，得到了越来越多的台湾同胞、港澳同胞和海外侨胞、华人的理解和支持。广大台湾同胞为发展两岸关系作出了很大的努力。台湾当局近几年也相应调整了对大陆的政策，采取了一些松动措施，诸如开放岛内民众赴大陆探亲，逐步放宽对两岸民间交流交往的限制，扩大间接贸易，开放间接投资，简化两岸同胞通话、通邮、通汇的手续。这些都是有利于相互交往的。近年来，两岸的经济贸易迅速发展，人员住来及各项交流活动不断扩大。一九九三年四月举行的“汪辜会谈”签订了四项协议，迈出了两岸关系上具有历史意义的重要一步。台湾海峡出现了四十余年来前所未有的缓和气氛，这是有利于和平统一的。
Such policies and measures of the Chinese Government have won the understanding and support of more and more Taiwan compatriots, compatriots in Hong Kong and Macao as well as overseas Chinese and people of Chinese descent. On their part, Taiwan compatriots have contributed tremendously to the development of inter-Straits relations. In recent years the Taiwan authorities have in turn made readjustments in their policy regarding the mainland. They have taken steps to ease the situation, such as allowing people to visit relatives on the mainland, gradually reducing the restrictions on people-to-people exchanges and contact, expanding indirect trade, permitting indirect investment and cutting red tape in inter-Straits post, telecommunications and bank remittance services. All these are conducive to better interchanges. The past few years have witnessed rapid growth of economic relations and trade as well as increasing mutual visits and sundry exchanges across the Straits. The Wang Daohan--Koo Chen-fu Talks in April 1993 resulted in four agreements, marking a step forward of historic significance in inter-Straits relations. Thus an atmosphere of relaxation prevails in the Taiwan Straits for the first time in the past four decades. This is auspicious to peaceful reunification.
　　必须指出，台湾当局虽对两岸关系作了某些松动，但其现行大陆政策仍严重阻碍着两岸关系的发展和国家的统一。他们口头上虽声称“中国必须统一”，但行动上却总是背离一个中国的原则，继续维持与大陆分离的局面，拒绝就和平统一问题进行商谈，甚至设置障碍，限制两岸交往的进一步发展。
It should be pointed out that notwithstanding a certain measure of easing up by the Taiwan authorities, their current policy vis-a-vis the mainland still seriously impedes the development of relations across the Straits as well as the reunification of the country. They talk about the necessity of a reunified China, but their deeds are always a far cry from the principle of one China. They try to prolong Taiwan's separation from the mainland and refuse to hold talks on peaceful reunification. They have even set up barriers to curb the further development of the interchanges across the Straits.
　　近年来，台湾岛内“台独”活动日形嚣张，给两岸关系的发展和国家和平统一投下了阴影。“台独”的产生有着复杂的社会历史根源和国际背景，而台湾当局拒绝和谈、限制交往、在国际上推行“双重承认”和“两个中国”的政策，又实际上为“台独”活动提供了条件。应当说，台湾同胞要求当家作主管理台湾的愿望是合情合理的、正当的，这不同于“台湾独立”，更与极少数坚持要走“台独”道路的人有着根本的区别。极少数“台独”分子鼓吹“独立”，甚至投靠外国，妄图将台湾从中国分裂出去，这是违背包括台湾同胞在内的全中国人民的根本利益的。中国政府严重关注这一事态的发展，对任何制造“台湾独立”的行径绝不会坐视不理。
In recent years the clamours for "Taiwan independence" on the island have become shriller, casting a shadow over the course of relations across the Straits and the prospect of peaceful reunification of the country. The "Taiwan independence" fallacy has a complex social-historical root and international background. But the Taiwan authorities have, in effect, abetted this fallacy by its own policy of rejecting peace negotiations, restricting interchanges across the Straits and lobbying for "dual recognition" or "two Chinas" in the international arena. It should be affirmed that the desire of Taiwan compatriots to run the affairs of the island as masters of their own house is reasonable and justified. This should by no means be construed as advocating "Taiwan independence". They are radically distinct from those handful of "Taiwan independence" protagonists who trumpet "independence" but vilely rely on foreign patronage in a vain attempt to detach Taiwan from China, which runs against the fundamental interests of the entire Chinese people including Taiwan compatriots. The Chinese Government is closely following the course of events and will never condone any manoeuvre for "Taiwan independence".
　　某些国际势力不希望中国统一，仍千方百计插手中国内政，支持台湾当局的“反共拒和”政策和岛内的分裂势力，为中国的和平统一制造障碍，严重伤害了中国人民的民族感情。
Certain foreign forces who do not want to see a reunified China have gone out of their way to meddle in China's internal affairs. They support the anti-Communist stance of the Taiwan authorities of rejecting peace talks and abet the secessionists on the island, thereby erecting barriers to China's peaceful reunification and seriously wounding the national feelings of the Chinese people.
　　中国政府坚信，广大台湾同胞是要求国家统一的；台湾朝野政治力量的大多数也是主张国家统一的。在两岸人民共同努力下，上述障碍和阻力一定可以排除，两岸关系一定可以获得更好的发展。
The Chinese Government is convinced that Taiwan compatriots want national reunification and that this is also true with most of the political forces in or out of office in Taiwan. The people on both sides of the Straits will overcome all the barriers and stumbling blocks by their joint efforts and ensure a better development of relations across the Straits.
国际事务中涉及台湾的几个问题
 Several Questions Involving Taiwan in International Relations
　　如前所述，世界上只有一个中国，台湾是中国不可分割的一部分。中华人民共和国政府作为代表全中国人民的唯一合法政府，得到了联合国及世界各国的普遍承认。为维护国家主权和实现国家的统一，中国政府在国际事务中处理涉及台湾的问题时，始终坚持一个中国的原则，一贯维护台湾同胞的利益。中国政府相信，这一立场必能赢得各国政府和人民的尊重。在此，中国政府认为有必要就以下几个问题重申自己的立场和政策。
As has been elucidated in the foregoing, there is only one China in the world, of which Taiwan is an inalienable part. The Government of the People's Republic of China has been recognized by the United Nations and throughout the world as the sole legal government representing the entire Chinese people. In the interest of safeguarding state sovereignty and realizing national reunification the Chinese Government has always stood firm on the principle of one China and ensured the interests of Taiwan compatriots in international relations involving Taiwan. The Chinese Government has no doubt that its position will be respected by all other governments and people.The Chinese Government deems it necessary to reiterate its position and policy on the following matters.
与中国建交国同台湾的关系问题。
Relations between Taiwan and countries maintaining diplomatic ties with China
    目前，世界上凡与中国建交的国家，均遵照国际法和一个中国的原则，与中国政府就台湾问题达成正式协议或谅解，承诺不与台湾建立任何官方性质的关系。按照国际法，一个主权国家只能有一个中央政府代表这个国家。台湾作为中国的一部分，它在国际上无权代表中国，不能与外国建立外交关系和发展具有官方性质的关系。但考虑到台湾经济发展的需要和台湾同胞的实际利益，对台湾同外国的民间经济、文化往来，中国政府不持异议。
All countries maintaining diplomatic relations with China have, in conformity with international law and the principle of one China, undertaken in formal agreement or understanding with the Chinese Government not to establish any ties of an official nature with Taiwan. According to international law, a sovereign state can only be represented by a single central government. As a part of China, Taiwan has no right to represent China in the international community, nor can it establish diplomatic ties or enter into relations of an official nature with foreign countries. Nevertheless, considering the needs of Taiwan's economic development and the practical interests of Taiwan compatriots, the Chinese Government has not objected to non-governmental economic or cultural exchanges between Taiwan and foreign countries.
　　近几年，台湾当局在国际上竭力推行所谓“务实外交”，谋求同一些与中国建交的国家发展官方关系，推行“双重承认”，达到制造“两个中国”、“一中一台”的目的。对此，中国政府坚决反对。
In recent years the Taiwan authorities have vigorously launched a campaign of "pragmatic diplomacy" to cultivate official ties with countries having diplomatic relations with China in an attempt to push "dual recognition" and achieve the objective of creating a situation of "two Chinas" or "one China, one Taiwan". The Chinese Government is firmly against this scheme.
　　应该指出，世界上绝大多数国家都能珍视同中国的友好关系，恪守在台湾问题上和中国达成的协议和谅解，中国政府对此表示赞赏。但也不能不指出，有的国家竟不顾国际信誉，违反与中华人民共和国建交时所作的承诺，同台湾发展官方关系，从而给中国统一事业设置障碍。中国政府衷心希望，有关国家的政府能够采取措施，纠正这一做法。
It is noted that the overwhelming majority of the countries of the world cherish friendly relations with China and abide by their agreement or understanding with China on the issue of Taiwan. The Chinese Government appreciates this. On the other hand, it should be pointed out that, in disregard of their international credibility, certain countries have breached the undertaking made at the time of the establishment of diplomatic ties with the People's Republic of China by evolving official relations with Taiwan, thereby putting a spoke in the wheel of China's reunification. The Chinese Government sincerely hopes that the governments in question will take measures to rectify the situation.
国际组织与台湾的关系问题。
Relations between international organizations and Taiwan
    每个国家的主权是完整的，既不能分割，也不能分享。中华人民共和国政府作为中国的唯一合法政府，有权利也有义务在国际组织中行使国家主权，代表整个中国。台湾当局企图在某些只有主权国家才能参加的国际组织中搞所谓“一国两席”，就是要制造“两个中国”。中国政府坚决反对这种行径。这一原则立场完全符合包括台湾同胞和海外侨胞在内的全中国人民的根本利益。只有在坚持一个中国原则立场的前提下，中国政府才可以考虑，根据有关国际组织的性质、章程规定和实际情况，以中国政府同意和接受的某种方式，来处理台湾参加某些国际组织活动的问题。
The sovereignty of each State is an integral whole which is indivisible and unsharable. The Government of the People's Republic of China, as the sole legal government of China, has the right and obligation to exercise state sovereignty and represent the whole of China in international organizations. The Taiwan authorities' lobbying for a formula of "one country, two seats" in international organizations whose membership is confined to sovereign states is a manoeuvre to create "two Chinas". The Chinese Government is firmly opposed to such an attempt. Its principled position fully conforms to the fundamental interests of the entire Chinese people including Taiwan compatriots and overseas Chinese. Only on the premise of adhering to the principle of one China and in the light of the nature and statutes of the international organizations concerned as well as the specific circumstances, can the Chinese Government consider the question of Taiwan's participation in the activities of such organizations and in a manner agreeable and acceptable to the Chinese Government.
　　联合国系统的所有机构，是由主权国家代表参加的政府间国际组织。在恢复中华人民共和国在联合国的合法权利后，联合国系统的所有机构都已通过正式决议，恢复中华人民共和国享有的合法席位，驱逐了台湾当局的“代表”。自此，在联合国组织中的中国代表权问题已获得了彻底的解决，根本不存在台湾再加入的问题。需要指出的是，近一个时期来，台湾当局的某些人又为“重返联合国”而大肆鼓噪。十分明显，这是一种妄图割裂国家主权的行径，它无论在法理上或实际上都是行不通的。中国政府相信各国政府和联合国系统的组织会识破这一图谋，不做有损于中国主权的事情。
All the specialized agencies and organizations of the United Nations system are inter-governmental organizations composed of sovereign states. After the restoration of the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations, all the specialized agencies and organizations of the U.N. system have formally adopted resolutions restoring to the People's Republic of China its lawful seat and expelling the "representatives" of the Taiwan authorities. Since then the issue of China's representation in the U.N. system has been resolved once and for all and Taiwan's re-entry is out of the question. However, it should be pointed out that recently some elements of the Taiwan authorities have been clamouring for "returning to the United Nations". Apparently, this is an attempt to split state sovereignty, which is devoid of any legal or practical basis. The Chinese Government is convinced that all governments and organizations of the U.N. system will be alert to this scheme and refrain from doing anything prejudicial to China's sovereignty.
　　其他政府间国际组织，原则上台湾也无权参加。至于亚洲开发银行(ADB)、亚太经济合作组织(APEC)等地区性经济组织，台湾的加入系根据中国政府与有关方面达成的协议或谅解，明确规定中华人民共和国作为主权国家参加，台湾只作为中国的一个地区以“中国台北”(英文在亚行为TAIPEI，CHINA；在亚太经济合作组织为CHINESETAIPEI)的名称参加活动。这种做法属于特殊安排，不能构成其他政府间国际组织及国际活动效仿的“模式”。
In principle, Taiwan is also ineligible for membership in other categories of inter-governmental organizations. As to regional economic organizations such as the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), Taiwan's participation is subject to the terms of agreement or understanding reached between the Chinese Government and the parties concerned which explicitly prescribe that the People's Republic of China is a full member as a sovereign state whereas Taiwan may participate in the activities of those organizations only as a region of China under the designation of Taipei, China (in ADB) or Chinese Taipei (in APEC). This is only an ad hoc arrangement and cannot constitute a "model" applicable to other inter-governmental organizations or international gatherings.
　　在民间性质的国际组织中，中华人民共和国的相应组织同有关方面达成协议或谅解，在中国的全国性组织以中国的名义参加的情况下，台湾的相应组织可以以“中国台北”(TAIPEI，CHINA)或“中国台湾”(TAIWAN，CHINA)的名称参加。
As regards participation in non-governmental international organizations, the relevant bodies of the People's Republic of China may reach an agreement or understanding with the parties concerned so that China's national organizations would use the designation of China, while Taiwan's organizations may participate under the designation of Taipei, China or Taiwan, China.
与中国建交国同台湾通航问题。
Aviation services between Taiwan and countries having diplomatic relations with China
    一个国家的领空是该国领土不可分割的组成部分。一九一九年公布的《巴黎航空公约》和一九四四年签署的《芝加哥公约》均确认，每个国家对其领空具有完全的、排他性的主权的原则。因此，凡是同中国建交国家的任何航空公司，即使是私营航空公司与台湾通航，都是涉及中国主权的政治问题，而不是一般的民间关系。与中国建交国家的官方航空公司当然不可与台湾通航，而其民间航空公司如欲同台湾通航，则须由其政府与中国政府磋商。在征得中国政府同意后，其民间航空公司始可同台湾的私营航空公司互飞。实际上，根据上述原则，中国政府已经同意英、德、加拿大等国的民间航空公司与台湾的私营航空公司通航。
Airspace is an inalienable part of a country's territory. The 1919 Paris Aviation Convention and the 1944 Chicago Convention affirm the principle of complete and exclusive sovereignty of each country over its airspace. Therefore, the opening of aviation services with Taiwan by any airlines, including privately-operated ones, of countries having diplomatic relations with China is a political issue affecting China's sovereignty and cannot be regarded as a non-political transaction. State-run airlines of countries having diplomatic relations with China certainly must not operate air services to Taiwan. Privately-operated airlines must seek China's consent through consultations between their government and the Chinese Government before they can start reciprocal air services with privately-operated airlines of Taiwan. As a matter of fact, according to the afore-said principle the Chinese Government has consented to such services between privately-operated airlines of Britain, Germany, Canada, etc. and their counterparts in Taiwan.
　　有的国家在与中华人民共和国建交前就同台湾通航的，则可通过与中国政府谈判，改变其同台湾通航的官方性质后继续其民间商业运输安排。
As for countries which already had aviation services with Taiwan before the establishment of diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China, they can negotiate with the Chinese Government to change the official nature of such services so as to be able to continue the operations as privately-run commercial transportation undertakings.
与中国建交国向台湾出售武器问题。
Arms sales to Taiwan by countries having diplomatic relations with China
    中国政府一贯坚决反对任何国家向台湾出售任何种类的武器装备或提供生产武器的技术。凡与中国建交的国家，都应遵循互相尊重主权和领土完整、互不干涉内政的原则，而不以任何形式或借口向台湾提供武器，否则就是违反国际关系准则，干涉中国内政。
The Chinese Government has always firmly opposed any country selling any type of arms or transferring production technology of the same to Taiwan. All countries maintaining diplomatic relations with China should abide by the principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and non-interference in each other's internal affairs, and refrain from providing arms to Taiwan in any form or under any pretext. Failure to do so would be a breach of the norms of international relations and an interference in China's internal affairs.
　　世界各国，尤其是对世界和平事业负有重大责任的大国，理应严格遵守联合国安理会五常任理事国关于限制常规武器扩散的指导原则，为维护和促进地区的和平与安全作出贡献。然而，在目前台湾海峡两岸关系日益缓和的形势下，有的国家竟违背自己在国际协议中的承诺，置中国政府的一再严正交涉于不顾，向台湾出售武器，在海峡两岸之间制造紧张局势。这不仅是对中国安全的严重威胁，为中国的和平统一事业设置障碍，也不利于亚洲和世界的和平与稳定。中国人民当然要强烈反对。
All countries, and especially big powers shouldering major responsibilities for world peace, are obligated to strictly abide by the guidelines laid down by the five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council to restrict the proliferation of conventional weapons so as to contribute to maintaining and promoting regional peace and security. However, at a time when relations across the Taiwan Straits are easing up, certain powers have seen fit to renege on their undertakings under international agreements and to flout the Chinese Government's repeated strong representations by making arms sales to Taiwan, thereby whipping up tension between the two sides of the Straits. This not only constitutes a serious threat to China's security and an obstacle to China's peaceful reunification, but also undermines peace and stability in Asia and the world at large. It stands to reason that the Chinese people should voice strong resentment against this conduct.
　　在国际事务中，中国政府一贯奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，坚持“互相尊重主权和领土完整、互不侵犯、互不干涉内政、平等互利、和平共处”五项原则，积极发展同世界各国的友好关系，从不损害别国利益，不干涉别国内政。同样，中国政府也要求各国政府，不做损害中国利益、干涉中国内政的事情，正确处理与台湾的关系问题。
In international affairs the Chinese Government always pursues an independent foreign policy of peace and adheres to the Five Principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit and peaceful Co-existence. It actively seeks to develop friendly relations with all countries of the world and will never undermine any country's interests nor interfere in its internal affairs. By the same token it expects all other governments to refrain from undermining China's interests or interfering in China's internal affairs and to correctly handle their relations with Taiwan.
结束语
Conclusion
　　中国的统一是中华民族的根本利益所在。
Reunification of the country embodies the fundamental interest of the Chinese nation.
　　中国实现统一后，两岸可携手合作，互补互助，发展经济，共同振兴中华。原来一直困扰台湾的各种问题，都将在一个中国的架构下得到合理解决。台湾同胞将与祖国其他地区人民一道共享一个伟大国家的尊严和荣誉。
After national reunification the two sides of the Taiwan Straits can pool their resources and make common cause in economic development and work towards China's resurgence. Numerous problems that have been besetting Taiwan would be judiciously resolved within the framework of one China. Taiwan compatriots will share the pride and glory of a great nation with their kith and kin from the other parts of the motherland.
　　长期以来，台湾问题一直是亚洲与太平洋地区一个不稳定的因素。中国的统一，不仅有利于中国本身的稳定和发展，也有利于中国同各国进一步加强友好合作关系，有利于亚太地区乃至全世界的和平与发展。
Taiwan question has long been a destabilizing factor in the Asia-Pacific region. Reunification of China will not only bolster the stability and development of the country itself, but also contribute to the further enhancement of the friendly relations and cooperation between China and other countries as well as to peace and development in the Asia-Pacific region and the world as a whole.
　　中国政府相信，在维护自己国家主权与领土完整的正义事业中，一定能够得到世界各国政府和人民的理解和支持。
The Chinese Government is confident that it can count on the understanding and support of governments and people of all countries in the pursuit of its just cause of safeguarding its state sovereignty and territorial integrity.
中国妇女的状况
The Situation Of Chinese Women 
中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China
一九九四年六月·北京
June 1994, Beijing

目　录
Contents
前言
Foreword
中国妇女的历史性解放
Historic Liberation of Chinese Women
平等的法律地位
Equal Legal Status
在经济领域中的平等权利与重要作用
Equal Rights and Important Role in Economic Sphere
广泛参与国家和社会事务的管理
Extensive Participation in Administration of State and Social Affairs
在社会生活领域中充分发展
Full Advance in Society
婚姻家庭领域中的平等地位
Equal Status in Marriage and Family Life
中国妇女权益的组织保障
Organizational Guarantees of the Rights and Interests of Chinese Women
积极参与国际妇女活动
Active Participation in International Women's Activities

前言
Foreword
　　1992年3月，联合国决定第四次世界妇女大会于1995年在中国首都北京召开，这使中国妇女的状况倍受世界关注。
In March 1992, the United Nations decided to hold in 1995 the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing, the capital of China. This has aroused greater world attention on the status of Chinese women.
　　在几千年的封建社会和百余年的半殖民地半封建社会中，中国妇女曾经有过长期受压迫、受屈辱、受摧残的悲惨历史。从本世纪上半叶起，广大妇女在中国共产党的领导下，为了民族和自身的解放，经过几十年不屈不挠的英勇奋斗，直到中华人民共和国成立，占全世界妇女四分之一的中国妇女终于获得了历史性的解放。
In the feudal society which lasted several millennia and the subsequent century of semi-colonial and semi-feudal society, Chinese women experienced a bitter history of prolonged oppression, degradation and abasement. From the first half of this century, masses of women plunged into an undaunted and heroic struggle lasting several decades under the leadership of the Communist Party of China. This was a quest for national liberation and their own emancipation. It was not until the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949 that Chinese women, who make up one-fourth of their sex in the world, finally won their historic freedom.
　　新中国宣告了中国妇女在政治、经济、文化、社会和家庭生活等各方面均享有与男子平等的权利，她们和全体中国公民一样成为国家与社会的主人。中国的各种法律保障妇女与男子具有同等的权利和地位，具有同等的人格和尊严。中国政府运用法律的、行政的和教育的手段消除对妇女的各种歧视，保护妇女的特殊权益。今天，中国妇女已享有中国社会几千年来从未达到、许多发达国家历时数百年方才得到承认的平等权利。
New China proclaimed that Chinese women enjoy equal rights with men in all aspects of political, economic, cultural, social and family life and that they have become, like all Chinese citizens, masters of the state and society. Chinese laws guarantee that women and men enjoy the same rights and status and have equal personal dignity. The Chinese government employs legal, administrative and educational means to eliminate all kinds of discrimination against women and protect their special rights and interests. Today, as an important token of civilization and progress, Chinese women enjoy the equal rights which had remained unattainable in Chinese society over millennia and which only became accepted in many developed countries after some centuries.
　　在社会主义制度下，中国妇女曾被禁锢的聪明才智极大地释放出来。她们以主人翁的姿态积极地投身于中国的建设和发展，成为创造物质文明和精神文明的伟大力量。她们是中国改革开放和现代化建设的生力军，在工农业生产、科学、文化、教育、卫生等各项事业中作出了极其重要的贡献。在中国，“半边天”成为全社会对妇女作用最形象的赞誉。
Under the socialist system, the once-stifled wisdom and talents of Chinese women have been released to a great extent. Women are actively plunging into China's social development as masters of society, becoming a great force in both economic construction and cultural and ideological advances. They are a vital force in China's reform and opening to the outside world and the modernization drive. Women have made extremely important contributions in various undertakings, including industrial and agricultural production, science, culture, education and health care. In China, the expression "women hold up half the sky" has become the most vivid expression the entire society uses to praise the role played by women.
　　在推动社会发展的同时，中国妇女的精神面貌发生了重大变化，她们自尊、自信、自立、自强，在参政能力、文化水平、科学知识、生产技能等各方面都有了长足的进步。
While women's impetus for social development has been forming, great changes have taken place in their mental outlook. They have gained a sense of self-respect, self-confidence, self-reliance and self-strengthening and have taken long strides forward in their ability to participate in government and political affairs, in their cultural accomplishment, level of scientific knowledge and production skills.
　　中国妇女有着热爱和平的光荣传统。她们从未忘记侵略战争带来的深重灾难，坚决支持中国政府的和平外交政策。无论世界上发生什么样的冲突，她们总是站在正义与被侵略者一边，反对暴力与侵略。中国妇女是维护世界和平的重要力量。
Chinese women have a glorious peace-loving tradition. They have never forgotten the calamities caused by aggressive wars and rendered resolute support for the peaceful foreign policies adopted by the Chinese government. No matter what clashes might break out in the world, they always stand on the side of justice and the victims of aggression and oppose violence and aggression. Chinese women are an important force in safeguarding world peace.
　　建国四十五年来，特别是改革开放十五年来，中国妇女在“平等、发展、和平”的方向上取得了历史性的伟大进步。这是世界妇女进步事业的重要组成部分，也是中国人权进步的重要组成部分。
Over the past 45 years, especially in the 15 years since the introduction of reform and opening to the outside world, Chinese women have achieved truly historic advances toward the goal of "equality, development and peace". This great forward march is an important component of the progressive cause of women worldwide; it is also an important part of the progress China has made in human rights.
　　中国是一个发展中国家，受社会发展水平的制约和旧观念的影响，中国妇女的状况还有不尽如人意的地方，在现实生活中，妇女的参政、就业、受教育以及婚姻家庭中平等权利的完全实现，还存在着各种困难和阻力，轻视、歧视甚至侵害妇女的现象还时有发生，妇女的整体素质也有待于进一步提高。因此，中国妇女解放和发展的道路远没有完结。中国政府正在致力于发展经济，加强法制，消除一切歧视或轻视妇女的落后观念，促进中国法律赋予的男女平等权利在社会生活中全面实现，争取本世纪在中国实现《内罗毕战略》的各项发展目标。
China is a developing country. Owing to the constraints of social development and the influence of old concepts, the condition of Chinese women is still not wholly satisfactory. There exist various difficulties and resistance which have prevented the full realization of equal rights to women with respect to their participation in political and government affairs, employment, access to education, as well as marriage and family. Instances of looking down upon and discrimination against women and even infringement of their rights still occur from time to time. On the other hand, the overall competence of women remains to be further enhanced. All these account for the fact that the road toward emancipation and progress for Chinese women has not reached its end. The Chinese government is making every effort to develop the economy, strengthen the legal system, eradicate all backward ideas of discriminating against and looking down on women and promote equal rights for men and women in all spheres of social life as stipulated in Chinese law. This will speed the realization of the various development goals of the Nairobi Strategies in China before the end of this century.
　　中国政府、中国妇女和全体中国人民热情地欢迎第四次世界妇女大会在北京召开，正在全力以赴地为会议做好各项准备工作。为使国际社会更好地了解东道国的妇女情况，现将中国妇女的状况公诸于世界。
The Chinese government, Chinese women and Chinese people as a whole warmly welcome the convocation of the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing. They are going all out to make comprehensive preparations for the congress. To enable the international community to acquire a better understanding of the condition of women in the host country, we have prepared this report for release to the world.
中国妇女的历史性解放
Historic Liberation of Chinese Women
　　在半殖民地半封建的旧中国，妇女长期被压在社会的最底层。20世纪上半叶，中国共产党领导中国人民在这块古老的土地上进行了一场伟大而深刻的民族民主革命，伴随着这场革命掀起了大规模的群众性妇女解放运动，使中国妇女获得了举世瞩目的历史性解放。
In semi-colonial and semi-feudal old China, women were for a long time kept at the bottom of society. It was not until the first half of this century that the Chinese Communist Party led the Chinese people to wage a great and profound national democratic revolution on this ancient land. At the same time, a large-scale women's emancipation movement was launched, resulting in the historic liberation of Chinese women which won worldwide attention.
　　延续了几千年的封建宗法制度对中国妇女的压迫和摧残特别深重。妇女在政治、经济、文化、社会、家庭等方面，都处于与男子不平等的地位。这突出表现在：
The impact of the several millennia of oppression and devastation imposed by the feudal patriarchal system on Chinese women was exceptionally grave. In political, economic, cultural, social and family life, women were considered inferior to men. This was profoundly manifested in the following ways:
　　政治上无权，完全被排斥在社会政治生活之外。经济上依附，没有财产所有权和继承权，没有独立的经济来源。社会上无地位，被要求在家从父、出嫁从夫、夫死从子，没有独立的人格和身份，被剥夺了接受文化教育和参加社会活动的权利。婚姻上不自主，必须听从“父母之命，媒妁之言”，丈夫死了不得再嫁。身心上受摧残，不仅受到一夫多妻制的压迫和娼妓制度的迫害，而且绝大多数人从小被迫缠足，数百年来，“小脚女人”竟成了中国妇女的一个代称。
Possessing no political rights, women were completely excluded from social and political life. Economically dependent, women were robbed of property and inheritance rights and possessed no independent source of income. Having no social status, women were forced to obey their fathers before marriage, their husbands after marriage and their sons if they became widowed. They had no personal dignity or independent status, and were deprived of the right to receive an education and take part in social activities. They enjoyed no freedom in marriage but had to obey the dictates of their parents and heed the words of matchmakers, and were not allowed to remarry if their spouse died. They were subjected to physical and mental torture, being harassed by systems of polygamy and prostitution, the overwhelming majority of them forced to bind their feet from childhood. For centuries, "women with bound feet" was a synonym for the female gender in China.
　　1840年鸦片战争以后，西方列强的相继入侵更加重了中国妇女的苦难。在1937年开始的日本全面侵华战争中，有3000多万男女老幼惨遭杀害，其中妇女儿童占多数。仅在日军占领南京后的一个月内，就发生日军强奸中国妇女的事件2万多起。帝国主义、封建势力和官僚资本主义相勾结对中国人民进行残酷的压迫和剥削，把中国推向了亡国灭族的边缘，也把中国妇女推向了前所未有的苦难深渊。
The successive invasions by the Western powers after the Opium War in 1840 aggravated the plight of Chinese women. In the full-scale war of aggression launched by Japan against China from 1937 on, most of the over 30 million Chinese who were brutally killed were women and children. Within a month after the Japanese troops occupied Nanjing, they committed over 20,000 rapes. The cruel oppression and exploitation of the Chinese people by imperialist and feudalist forces as well as bureaucratic capitalism pushed China to the brink of national subjugation and annihilation. It also plunged Chinese women into an abyss of misery never witnessed before.
　　为挽救民族的危亡和谋求自身的解放，中国妇女与全国人民一道，进行了长达一百多年的不屈不挠的斗争，掀起了一次又一次的妇女解放运动。太平天国运动制定、颁布了一系列男女平等的政策；戊戌维新运动倡导并一度引发了戒缠足和兴女学运动；辛亥革命兴起了以实现男女平权、争取女子参政为主要目标的女权运动。这些运动促进了中国妇女的觉醒，但终究没有能够从根本上改变中国妇女被压迫、受奴役的悲惨命运。
For national salvation and self emancipation, Chinese women, along with the entire nation, waged a dauntless struggle that lasted for over a century. They also launched a succession of movements for women's liberation. The Taiping Heavenly Kingdom enacted and promulgated a series of policies on sexual equality. The Reform Movement of 1898 advocated and ignited the wave to ban feet binding and establish schools for women. The 1911 Revolution kindled a feminist movement which focused on equal rights for men and women and participation by women in political affairs. These movements promoted the awakening of Chinese women. Nevertheless, they all failed to bring about a fundamental change in their miserable plight as victims of oppression and enslavement.
　　中国共产党从诞生之日起，便将实现妇女解放和男女平等作为奋斗目标之一。在共产常的领导下，妇女被动员和组织起来，形成了以工农劳动妇女为主体、团结全国各族各界妇女的广泛的统一战线，开展了与中国革命紧密结合的群众性妇女解放运动。特别是在共产党领导的根据地，革命政权颁布了一系列法律和法令，保障妇女权利，提高妇女地位，使全中国的妇女看到了光明和希望。
Ever since its birth, the Chinese Communist Party has made the achievement of female emancipation and equality between men and women one of its goals. Under the leadership of the Party, women were mobilized and organized to form a broad united front with working women in industry and agriculture as the main body. Women of all ethnic groups and walks of life united to stage popular women's liberation movements closely tied to the Chinese revolution. In Communist Party-led base areas in particular, the revolutionary political powers issued a series of decrees and regulations to ensure the rights of women and raise their status. This brought light and hope to women throughout the country.
　　中华人民共和国的成立，结束了中国妇女千百年来受封建社会压迫、奴役和受外国侵略者宰割、欺凌的历史，她们以崭新的姿态站立起来，与全国人民一起成了新中国的主人。1949年，中国人民政治协商会议第一届全体会议在北京召开，占全体代表10.4%的69名妇女出席了会议。她们与男代表一起共商建国大计。宋庆龄在这次会议上当选为中央人民政府副主席。李德全、史良等一批女性担任了政府的领导职务。会议通过的具有临时宪法性质的《共同纲领》庄严宣布，废除束缚妇女的封建制度，妇女在政治、经济、文化教育和社会生活各个方面均享有与男子平等的权利，从此开创了中国妇女解放的新时代。
For the women of China, the founding of the People's Republic of China ended the thousands of years of feudal oppression and enslavement and the history of being trampled and bullied by foreign aggressors. With an entirely new face, they have stood up and become the masters of new China like all citizens of the country. In 1949, the First Plenary Session of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference was convened in Beijing. The 69 women present accounted for 10.4 percent of the delegates. They represented women throughout the country in discussions together with men delegates on matters of vital importance for the country's construction. At the conference, Soong Ching Ling was elected vice-chairperson of the Central People's Government. Li Dequan, Shi Liang and some other women were also placed in leading posts in the government. The Common Program, adopted by the conference which had the nature of a provisional constitution, solemnly declared the toppling of the feudal system which fettered women and stated that women enjoyed equal rights with men in the political, economic, cultural and educational fields and in other aspects of social life. Thus a new era in the emancipation of Chinese women was ushered in.
　　建国后，为迅速改变旧中国遗留下来的经济文化落后面貌，革除束缚、歧视和摧残妇女的旧制度和旧习俗，在全国范围内掀起了一系列波澜壮阔的群众运动，使妇女的社会地位和状况发生了翻天覆地的历史性变化。
After the founding of the People's Republic, there was a surge of mass movements throughout the country to quickly change the backward economic and cultural outlook left over by old China and eradicate the antiquated system and outmoded customs that fettered, discriminated against and humiliated women. This effected an earth-shaking historic change in the social status and condition of women.
土地改革。
Land reform. 
在旧中国，占农村人口70%的贫雇农只占有10%的土地，而妇女则根本没有土地所有权。
In old China, poor farmers and farm laborers, who accounted for 70 percent of the rural population, owned only 10 percent of the land. Women had no right to own any land.
新中国建立伊始，就根据“按人口分配土地”的原则，在农村开展了广泛深刻的土地改革运动。
In the very early days of the People's Republic, a widespread and profound land reform movement was carried out, in accordance with the principle of distributing land on the basis of the number of members in a family. 
广大农村妇女与男子一样分得了土地，成为土地的主人，从根本上改变了男女经济不平等的状态。
Rural women obtained land, just like their male counterparts, and became masters of their piece of soil. This fundamentally altered the situation of economic inequality between men and women.

妇女走出家门。随着经济的恢复和发展，在全国范围内兴起了妇女走出家门参加社会生产的热潮。1957年，全国有70%的农村妇女参加了农业生产；城市女职工达到328.6万人，与1949年相比，增加了4.5倍。这彻底改变了旧中国将妇女排斥在社会生产劳动之外的状况，使妇女有了独立的经济来源。
The move out of the home. Along with the economic rehabilitation and development, there appeared a nationwide upsurge of women stepping out of their homes to take part in social production. In 1957, around 70 percent of rural women engaged in agricultural work, and the number of urban women workers and staff reached 3.286 million, representing a 5.5-fold increase over 1949. This thoroughly transformed the situation in which women were excluded from social productive labor, providing them with an independent source of income.
扫盲。
Illiteracy eradication campaign. 
在旧中国，妇女文盲比例达90%。
In old China, as many as 90 percent of women were illiterate.
新中国为提高全民族的文化水平，有计划、有步骤地开展了群众性扫除文盲运动，先后于1952年、1956年和1958年掀起三次扫盲高潮。从农村到城市都举办了各种识字班、民众夜校、职工业余学校，成千上万的妇女参加了扫盲学习。到1958年，有1600万妇女摆脱了文盲状态，初步改变了中国妇女愚昧落后的状况。
 In order to raise the cultural level of the entire nation, New China launched a planned campaign to gradually wipe out illiteracy. The mass campaign witnessed three upsurges in 1952, 1956 and 1958. Various literacy classes, popular evening schools and workers' spare-time schools mushroomed in both rural and urban areas, and women attended these in their millions. By 1958, 16 million women had learned to read, and this represented an initial step in eradicating the ignorance and backwardness of Chinese women.
宣传和贯彻婚姻法。1950年颁布的《中华人民共和国婚姻法》是新中国的第一部法律。该法明确宣布：废除包办强迫、男尊女卑、漠视子女利益的封建主义婚姻制度，实行男女婚姻自由、一夫一妻、男女平等、保护妇女和子女合法利益的新的婚姻制度。这是中国社会几千年来婚姻家庭生活的深刻变革。婚姻法颁布后，全国开展了大规模的宣传和贯彻婚姻法的群众运动，使大量封建婚约得到解除，打骂、虐待妇女的现象迅速减少，自由恋爱、婚姻自主蔚然成风。经过几年的艰苦工作，终于从根本上打碎了几千年来封建婚姻制度所强加于妇女的枷锁，基本实现了婚姻自由。
Publicity and implementation of the Marriage Law. The Marriage Law of the People's Republic of China, promulgated in 1950, was the first statute enacted by New China. It clearly declared the abolition of the feudal marriage system characterized by arranged and forced marriage, male superiority and female inferiority, and disregard for the interests of children. Implementation of the new system was marked by freedom for both men and women in marriage, monogamy, sexual equality and protection of the legitimate rights of women and children. This signified a profound revolution in the patterns of wedded and family life that had prevailed for several thousand years in Chinese society. In the months that followed the law's promulgation, a large-scale mass campaign was staged throughout the country to publicize and implement the Marriage Law. This action resulted in the annulment of numerous feudal engagements, a rapid reduction in wife bashing and maltreatment, and freely chosen love marriages became prevalent. Through several years of hard work, the shackles imposed upon women by the millennia-old feudal marriage system was smashed and freedom of marriage was basically established.
禁娼。妓院和卖淫嫖娼是旧中国遗留下来的社会丑恶现象之一。新中国一成立便迅速采取有力措施禁娼。1949年11月，北京市第二届人民代表会议率先作出禁娼决定，当即关闭妓院，将妓女集中起来加以教育，改造其思想，医治其性病，引导和帮助她们建立正常生活，使其成为自食其力的劳动者。继北京之后，包括上海、天津在内的全国各大中小城市纷纷开展禁娼运动。在很短的时间内，就使这种在旧中国屡禁不绝、严重摧残妇女身心和侮辱妇女人格的社会痼疾绝迹，社会面貌为之一新。
-- Ban on prostitution. Brothels, prostitution and whoring were among the disgusting social phenomena left over by old China. Immediately after its founding, New China adopted resolute measures to outlaw prostitution. In November 1949, the Second People's Representative Conference of Beijing Municipality took the lead in adopting a decision to ban prostitution. The municipal government immediately closed all brothels and gathered prostitutes in designated places where they could be educated, have their thinking reformed, receive treatment for venereal diseases, and be provided with guidance to help them start normal lives and support themselves through their own work. Following the example of Beijing, all large, medium-sized and small cities in the country, including Shanghai and Tianjin, waged campaigns to wipe out prostitution. In a very short period of time, the sale of sex, a chronic social malady that seemed impossible to eradicate in old China and which seriously damaged the physical and mental health of women and degraded their dignity, disappeared, enabling society to take on a brand-new outlook.
　　新中国通过这些规模宏大的群众运动，仅用了短短几年的时间，就荡涤了几千年封建社会遗留下来的污泥浊水，使妇女在政治、经济、文化、社会和家庭生活各方面都获得了根本性解放。这是中国近代社会发展史上值得自豪的重大变革，也是中国革命对世界妇女解放运动的重大贡献。
By means of these large-scale mass movements, New China took only a few years to clean up the filth and mire left over from a feudal society that had lasted for thousands of years. It effected fundamental emancipation for women in all aspects of political, economic, cultural, social and family life. This represented a significant transformation in the history of contemporary social development that China can be proud of. It was also an important contribution made by the Chinese revolution to the worldwide movement for women's liberation.
平等的法律地位
Equal Legal Status 
　　中国十分重视对女性的法律保障，妇女享有与男子平等的法律地位。现在，已形成了以宪法为基础，以妇女权益保障法为主体，包括国家各种单行法律法规、地方性法规和政府各部门行政法规在内的一整套保护妇女权益和促进男女平等的法律体系。
China attaches great importance to providing legal protection for females. Women enjoy equal legal status with men. Now, a comprehensive legal system has come into being to protect the rights and interests of women and promote sexual equality. It takes the Constitution as the basis and the Law on the Protection of Rights and Interests of Women as the core, and encompasses various specific state laws and regulations, administrative decrees and regulations enacted by various government departments, and local legislation.
　　中国妇女立法的基本原则是男女权利平等，保护妇女特殊权益，禁止歧视、虐待、残害妇女。《中华人民共和国宪法》明确规定，“妇女在政治的、经济的、文化的、社会的和家庭生活等各方面享有同男子平等的权利。”“国家保护妇女的权利和利益，实行男女同工同酬，培养和选拔妇女干部。”“婚姻、家庭、母亲和儿童受国家保护。”“禁止破坏婚姻自由，禁止虐待老人、妇女和儿童。”依据宪法确定的原则，新中国陆续颁布了《婚姻法》、《选举法》、《继承法》、《民法》、《刑法》等十余部基本法，国务院及所属部委颁布了40余种行政法规与条例，地方政府制定了80余种地方性法规，这些法规都明确规定了保护妇女权益的条款。任何一部中国法律都不存在对妇女的歧视性条款。
The basic principles in China's legislative work concerning women are equal rights for men and women, protection of the special rights and interests of women, and the banning of any discrimination, maltreatment and persecution directed at women. The Constitution of the People's Republic of China clearly stipulates, "Women enjoy equal rights with men in all spheres of life, political, economic, cultural and social, including family life....The state protects the rights and interests of women, applies the principle of equal pay for equal work for men and women alike and trains and selects cadres from among women....Marriage, the family and mother and child are protected by the state....Violation of the freedom of marriage is prohibited. Maltreatment of old people, women and children is prohibited." In line with the principles established by the Constitution, New China has promulgated over 10 fundamental laws, including the Marriage Law, Electoral Law, Law of Inheritance, Civil Law and Criminal Law. The State Council and various ministries and commissions under it have enacted over 40 administrative decrees and regulations. Local governments have devised more than 80 local regulations and rules. All these legislations include clear provisions on the protection of the rights and interests of women. No law in China contains clauses that discriminate against women.
　　1992年颁布实施的《中华人民共和国妇女权益保障法》，为进一步提高妇女的社会地位，保障妇女的基本权益，提供了有力的法律武器。
The Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of the Rights and Interests of Women promulgated in 1992 provided an effective legal weapon for further enhancing the social status of women and guaranteeing their basic rights and interests.
　　依据中国法律，妇女享有的法定权利有以下六个方面：
Under Chinese law, the legitimate rights of women can be summed up into the following six aspects:
妇女享有与男子平等的政治权利。妇女有权通过各种途径和形式，管理国家和社会事务，并享有平等的选举权和被选举权。为了切实保障妇女的参政权，法律规定，各级人民代表大会的代表中，应当有适当数量的妇女代表，并逐步提高妇女代表的比例；在任用领导人员时，必须坚持男女平等，重视培养、选拔女性担任领导职务。
Women enjoy equal political rights with men. Women have the right, through various channels and in various ways, to administer state and social affairs, and enjoy equal rights to vote and stand for election. To ensure female participation in government and political affairs, the law stipulates that deputies to the National People's Congress and local people's congresses at various levels should include appropriate numbers of women and the proportion should be increased step by step. It states that the principle of sexual equality should be upheld when appointing people to leading posts, and attention should be paid to training and selecting top officials from among women.
妇女享有与男子平等的文化教育权利。这种平等的权利包括入学、升学、毕业分配、授予学位、派出留学等各个方面，以及妇女从事科学技术研究和文学艺术创作等文化活动的权利。政府、社会、学校和家庭要保证女童接受义务教育的权利。
Women enjoy equal rights with men with respect to culture and education. These cover school admittance, advancement to higher levels of schooling, job assignment after graduation, conferment of academic degrees and being dispatched for study abroad, plus women's rights to engage in scientific and technological research and literary and artistic creation. The government, society, school and family have the responsibility to ensure that the right of female children and adolescents to receive compulsory education is observed.
妇女享有与男子平等的劳动权利。这主要有：劳动就业的权利，同工同酬的权利和休息的权利，获得安全和卫生保障以及特殊劳动保护的权利，享受社会保险的权利。法律规定，任何单位在录用职工时不得以性别为理由拒绝录用妇女或者提高对妇女的录用标准；不得以结婚、怀孕、产假、哺乳等为由，辞退女职工或单方面解除劳动合同；在晋升、晋级、评定专业技术职务以及分配住房和享受福利待遇等方面，不得歧视妇女；不得安排不适合妇女从事的工作和劳动；妇女在经期、孕期、产期和哺乳期受特殊保护。
Women enjoy equal working rights with men. These mainly include: the right to work and be employed, equal pay for equal work, time-off, on-the-job safety and medical care as well as special labor protection, and social insurance. The law stipulates that any unit, while recruiting employees, is not allowed to refuse to employ women or raise the recruitment standards for women under any pretext. It cannot fire women or unilaterally annul their labor contracts on the pretext of marriage, pregnancy, maternity leave or baby nursing. It is not allowed to discriminate against women in terms of promotion, award of academic and technical titles, allotment of housing and enjoyment of welfare benefits, nor to assign women to tasks that are not suitable for them. Women enjoy special protection during menstruation, pregnancy, child birth and baby nursing period.
妇女享有与男子平等的财产权利。法律规定，妇女在农村划分责任田、口粮田以及批准宅基地等方面享有同男子平等的权利；妇女在婚姻、家庭财产关系中，享有与男子平等的所有权和继承权；丧偶妇女有权处分继承的财产，任何人不得干涉。
Women enjoy equal property rights with men. The law stipulates that rural women enjoy the same rights as rural men in the allotment of "responsibility farmland" and "grain-ration farmland" and in the approval of housing sites. With regard to marriage and family property, women enjoy equal ownership and inheritance rights with men. Widows have the right to dispose of property they inherit, without interference from anyone.
妇女享有与男子平等的人身权利。妇女享有生命健康权、人身自由权、肖像权、名誉权等人格权，享有亲属权、监护权、荣誉权、制造者身份权等身份权。法律禁止溺、弃、残害女婴；禁止歧视、虐待生女婴的妇女和不育妇女；禁止用迷信暴力手段残害妇女；禁止虐待、遗弃老年妇女；禁止拐卖、绑架妇女；禁止组织、强迫、引诱、容留、介绍妇女卖淫。
Women enjoy equal rights with men relating to their persons. Women enjoy the right to life and health, freedom of the person, the right of portrait, reputation and other rights relating the person; and they enjoy the right of kinship, guardianship, fame and status as a producer. The law prohibits abandonment and drowning of female babies and other forms of infanticide and bans discrimination against and maltreatment of women who give birth to female babies and women who are sterile. It forbids tormenting women with superstitious and violent means and bans maltreatment or abandonment of aged women. It forbids the abduction and kidnapping of women as well as the sale and purchase of such women. It bans actions to organize, force, seduce, shelter or introduce women to engage in prostitution.
妇女享有与男子平等的婚姻家庭权利。法律规定，妇女享有平等的结婚和离婚自由权，在夫妻关系中男女平等。妇女有独立的姓名权，有参加社会生产和社会活动的自由。在离婚问题上妇女受到特殊保护。
Women enjoy equal rights with men in marriage and the family. The law states that women enjoy equal freedom in marriage and divorce, and the relations between husband and wife are equal. Women can use their own surnames and given names and participate in production and social activities. Women are subject to special protection with regard to divorce.
　　中国法律在明确规定妇女的各种具体权益的同时，强化国家机关在保障妇女权益方面的职责，明确妇联等妇女组织在诉讼中的特殊地位和作用，全面确定了保障妇女权益的法律机制。在《妇女权益保障法》的54条规定中，有75%的条文详细列举了侵权行为的后果和法律责任，为执法工作提供了可供操作的法律依据。
While clearly delineating the various concrete rights and interests of women, China's legislation amplifies the responsibilities of state organs in protecting women and clarifies the special status and role of the women's federations and other women's organizations in lawsuits, thus establishing a comprehensive legal mechanism for protecting women. Among the 54 articles of the Law on the Protection of the Rights and Interests of Women, 75 percent list in detail the consequences and legal responsibilities for infringements, thus providing an operational legal basis for enforcement of the law.
    中国目前尚处于社会主义初级阶段，经济、文化等方面的发展还较为落后，因此妇女法律权利的某些规定和保障机制也还有待于进一步完善。随着中国现代化建设的深入发展，中国保障妇女权益的法律体系将会不断完善。
At present, China is still at the primary stage of socialism and remains comparatively underdeveloped in economic and cultural development. Therefore, certain provisions on the legal rights of women and guarantee mechanisms need to be further improved. Along with the in-depth development of China's modernization drive, the country's legal system on the protection of women's rights and interests will be perfected.
在经济领域中的平等权利与重要作用
Equal Rights and Important Role In Economic Sphere
　　妇女经济地位的提高，是实现男女平等最重要的基础。中国政府为改善和提高妇女的经济地位作出了卓有成效的努力。在新的社会条件下，中国妇女成为社会发展的伟大力量，在社会主义经济建设中作出了巨大的贡献。
Improvement of the economic status of women constitutes the most important foundation for achieving sexual equality. The Chinese government has made fruitful efforts to upgrade and enhance the economic status of women. Under new conditions, Chinese women have become a great force in the country's social development, making major contributions to the socialist economic construction.
　　中国妇女享有与男子平等的就业权利。新中国成立以来，妇女就业人数不断增加。目前，中国女性从业人员已占社会总从业人员的44%左右，高于世界34.5%的比例；1992年女性从业人口占女性15岁以上人口的72.33%；农村妇女劳动力约占农村劳动力总数的一半，城镇女职工人数已由1949年的60万人增加到5600万人，占全国职工总数的比例也由7.5%提高到38%。妇女就业领域十分广泛。在国民经济12个行业中，女职工达100万人以上的行业就占9个，包括工业、农业、建筑业、交通运输业、商业、卫生、教育以及党政机关和社会团体等。妇女就业层次有了较大提高。1992年，在科学研究和综合技术服务事业、党政机关和社会团体业以及金融保险业中，女职工已分别占在业人数的34.4%、21.6%和37.3%。中国妇女尽管在就业方面有了长足的进步，但近年来也出现了一些新的问题，主要是一些单位不愿接收女性，造成女性就业难等。中国政府正积极采取措施促进这些问题的解决。
Chinese women enjoy equal rights with men in employment. Since the founding of the People's Republic in 1949, the population of employed women has risen constantly. In China, employed females now account for some 44 percent of the total number of employees, higher than the world rate of 34.5 percent. In 1992, employed females made up 72.33 percent of all women over 15, and in the countryside, women laborers made up half the rural labor force. The number of urban working women increased from 600,000 in 1949 to 56 million, while their share of the country's total working population went up from 7.5 percent to 38 percent. Woment's areas of employment cover a wide range. Among 12 branches of the national economy, nine employ over 1 million women. They include industry, agriculture, building, transport and communications, commerce, public health, education, Party and government organs and social organizations. There has been a remarkable upgrading of the kinds of jobs they are holding. In 1992, the number of women in scientific research and comprehensive technological services, Party and government organs and social organizations, and financial and insurance establishments accounted for 34.4 percent, 21.6 percent and 37.3 percent respectively of all employed in these fields. Despite the great progress made in the employment of Chinese women, some new problems have cropped up in recent years. For instance, women are experiencing difficulty finding jobs, chiefly because some units do not want to accept females. The Chinese government is now taking active measures to tackle these problems.
　　男女同工同酬原则已基本得到实行。在中国，同一行业、同一工种中技术熟练程度相同的劳动者，都可以获得同等报酬。但是，由于目前男女职工文化业务素质和职业构成的差异，男女实际收入尚有一定差距。据1990年调查，城市男女职工平均月收入分别为193.15元和149.60元，女性的平均收入是男性的77.4%；农村男女年平均收入分别为1518元和1235元，女性年均收入是男性的81.4%。此外，农村妇女年均收入在一万元以上的人数占女性总数的1.2%，男性的这一比例也是1.2%。这表明，在农村先富起来的人群中，男女收入差距已不明显。
The principle of equal pay for equal work for men and women is basically in place. In China, workers in the same industries, doing similar kinds of work and having the same technical skills, receive the same pay regardless of sex. However, due to current differences in cultural and professional competence as well as occupational composition, some real income gaps still exist between men and women. According to a survey conducted in 1990, the average monthly incomes for male and female workers in urban areas were 193.15 yuan and 149.60 yuan respectively, with women receiving only 77.4 percent of the pay given to men. In rural areas, the average annual incomes for men and women were 1,518 yuan and 1,235 yuan respectively, with women getting 81.4 percent of the earnings of men. However, 1.2 percent of all rural women earned an average annual income of over 10,000 yuan, and the percentage was the same for men. This indicates that, among those who have been the first to prosper in the countryside, the income gap between men and women has become insignificant.
　　中国政府对女职工采取了全面的劳动保护措施。据调查，城市女职工中85.3%的生育妇女都享有三个月的带薪产假，有些单位的女职工还享有半年的带薪产假；对处于孕期和哺乳期的女职工减少其工作量和工作时间；女职工比较多的国有企业大都建立了女职工卫生室、孕妇休息室、哺乳室、托儿所、幼儿园等设施。
The Chinese government provides comprehensive protective measures for employed women. According to a survey, 85.3 percent of child-bearing female workers and staff members in urban areas enjoy a three-month paid maternity leave, while some units have extended the leave to six months. Female workers during their pregnant and lactation period have their work load and work time reduced. Most state-owned enterprises where women predominate have established gynecological clinics, rest rooms for pregnant women, breastfeeding rooms, nurseries and kindergartens.
　　随着中国妇女经济地位的提高，她们在经济领域中发挥的作用也愈来愈大。
As the economic status of Chinese women improves, they are playing an increasingly significant role in the economic sphere.
　　70年代末开始的农村经济体制改革，大大解放了妇女劳动力，妇女成为振兴和发展农村经济不可缺少的重要力量。在农、林、牧、渔、水利业劳动者中，女性劳力占半数以上；产棉区的棉田管理大部分由妇女承担。在1400万农村商业服务业个体从业人员中，女性约占三分之一。在商品经济比较发达的地区，从商农民中妇女约占二分之一。在农业生产总值中，农村妇女创造的产值占50%至60%。
The rural economic restructuring, conducted since the end of the 1970s, unleashed the immense labor potential of women. Women have become an important and indispensable force in invigorating and promoting the rural economy. Females account for more than half of all workers in agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, fisheries and water conservancy. In major cotton-producing areas, the management of cotton fields is mostly undertaken by women. Of the 14 million self-employed rural individuals engaged in commerce and service trades, women account for about one-third. In areas where the commodity economy is relatively developed, rural women engaged in business account for half of farmers who have gone into trade. About 50-60 percent of the total rural output value is generated by women.
　　中国农村妇女是乡镇企业发展的重要推动者。目前，中国农村有一亿多乡镇企业劳动者，其中女性约有4000万人。在食品、服装、编织、玩具、电子产品、传统工艺和服务等行业的乡镇企业中，女性从业人数更多，创造的产值占总产值的65%左右。女职工占主体的纺织、丝绸、茶叶、编织、刺绣、玩具等行业的乡镇企业是中国出口创汇最多的企业。在乡镇企业中，不少女性担任了企业领导职务。如江苏、广东、安徽、福建、河南等省的乡镇企业中，各有约2000—3000名的女厂长、女经理，并各有数万人成为车间和班组的生产技术骨干。
Rural women in China are an important driving force for the development of township enterprises. At present, rural China boasts more than 100 million workers in township businesses, and 40 million of them are females. The ratio is even greater for women working in the food, clothing, knitwear and other woven products, toy and electronics industries, as well as traditional handicrafts and service trades. They create about 65 percent of the output value. Township enterprises producing textiles, silk, tea, knitwear and other woven products, embroidery and toys, where women make up the bulk of the employees, are the ones which earn the most foreign exchange for the country. Quite a few women become leaders at different levels in township enterprises. For instance, there are 2,000-3,000 women directors and managers in such businesses in each of the provinces of Jiangsu, Guangdong, Anhui, Fujian and Henan. In addition, tens of thousands of women serve as the technical backbone in production at workshop and shift level.
　　中国妇女在农村经济建设中的伟大作用获得了某些国际组织的赞扬。山东省龙口市的农村是联合国开发计划署和粮农组织选定的农村妇女问题国际监测点。这里的农村妇女不仅担负着40%至60%的农田作业量，而且在纺织、服装、刺绣等乡镇企业中担负着74%的生产任务。她们制作的刺绣工艺品每年可出口创汇约250万美元。近几年，来这里考察的20多个国家的100多名专家一致认为，龙口农村妇女发挥着与男性同等重要的作用。
The great role played by Chinese women in rural economic construction has won commendation from some international organizations. The rural area of Longkou City, Shandong Province, has been selected by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) as an international monitoring point for studying the problem of rural women. There, rural women not only shoulder 40 to 60 percent of the workload in the fields but also 74 percent of production tasks of township textile, clothing and embroidery enterprises. The embroidery articles they make are exported and can earn for the country US$2.5 million annually. In recent years, 100-odd experts from more than 20 countries have made study tours of the area. They have concurred that rural women in Longkou are playing as important a role as their male counterparts.
　　在城市，广大妇女为推动经济的改革与发展作出了重要贡献。1982—1990年，在金融、文教、广播电视、卫生、体育、社会福利、商饮供储、机关团体等行业中女职工人数增长速度分别超过男性21至78个百分点。1993年，全国企事业单位专业技术人员中，女性的比例达36.8%。女职工还积极参与企业的管理，为促进企业的发展献计献策。据调查，仅陕西、江苏等十省的女职工近三年内就提出合理化建议387万条，创经济效益21亿元。
In the cities, women have made important contributions to urban economic reform and development. In the 1982-90 period, the growth rate in the number of females employed in the following sectors, namely finance, culture and education, radio and television, public health, sport and recreation, social welfare, commercial concerns, catering, supply and storage, and government and social institutions, exceeded that of males by 21 to 78 percentage points. In 1993, females accounted for 36.8 percent of those with professional and technical titles in enterprises and institutions throughout the country. Women have taken an active part in management and offered numerous proposals and suggestions for the development of their enterprises. According to one survey, women workers and staff in Shaanxi, Jiangsu and eight other provinces alone raised 3.87 million rationalization proposals in the last three years, generating 2.1 billion yuan in economic returns.
　　与此同时，一大批女厂长、女经理在经济改革与开放的浪潮中脱颖而出。她们积极参与竞争，勇于迎接挑战，在企业的生存与发展中发挥了关键性的作用。1992年，辽宁省28个改革试点企业中有97名女职工通过激烈的竞争由一般职工成为企业的管理者和领导者。1988年和1992年共有107名女厂长、女经理当选全国优秀女企业家。
Many women factory directors and enterprise managers have come to the fore in the wave of economic reforms and the drive to open to the outside world. They have actively participated in competition and courageously accepted challenges, playing a vital role in ensuring the survival and development of their respective enterprises. In 1992, 97 females in the 28 pilot enterprises in Liaoning Province, picked to try out reforms, rose from rank and file to enterprise managers and leaders in the course of fierce competition. In 1988 and 1992, a total of 107 women factory directors and managers were cited as outstanding entrepreneurs.
　　建国四十多年来，中国妇女自尊、自信、自立、自强，不断提高自身素质，她们在经济建设中的历史功绩和伟大作用赢得了社会的称颂。1949—1988年，全国有2485.8万人获先进生产(工作)者称号。1978—1992年，有572名杰出的女性获全国劳动模范光荣称号，有20152名优秀女性获全国“三八”红旗手光荣称号。1988—1993年，有936名女性获全国“五一”劳动奖章。
In the 40-odd years since the founding of the People's Republic, Chinese women with a sense of self-respect, self-confidence, self-reliance and self-strengthening, have continued to enhance their own capabilities. Their historic accomplishments and significant role in the country's economic construction have won widespread commendation. From 1949 to 1988, a total of 24,858,000 women were awarded the title of advanced worker. In the 1978-92 period, 572 outstanding females were cited as national model workers, and 20,152 others were given the title of "March 8 (International Women's Day) Red-Banner Pacesetters". In 1988-93, 936 females were granted national "May 1" labor medals.
广泛参与国家和社会事务的管理
Extensive Participation in Administration of State and Social Affairs
　　在中国，妇女全面参与国家和社会事务的管理，为中国的民主和法制建设作出了巨大贡献。
In China, women take full part in administering state and social affairs and thus have made mammoth contributions to the country's development of democracy and building of its legal system.
　　中国妇女在各级人民代表大会中占有重要的位置。1954年召开第一届全国人民代表大会时，共有女代表147人，占代表总数的12%；到1993年召开第八届全国人民代表大会时，女代表已增至626人，占代表总数的21.03%。全国人民代表大会常务委员会是全国人民代表大会的常设机构。一届全国人大有4名女常委，占常委总数的5%，到八届全国人大时已有19名女常委，占常委总数的12.3%。1954年到1993年，先后有宋庆龄、何香凝、蔡畅、陈慕华等8位妇女担任全国人大常委会副委员长。
Chinese women occupy an important place in people's congresses at various levels. When the First National People's Congress (NPC) was held in 1954, there were only 147 women deputies, accounting for 12 percent of the total. By 1993, when the Eighth NPC was convened, the number of women deputies had increased to 626, accounting for 21.03 percent of the total. The permanent body of the National People's Congress, the Standing Committee, had only four women members, or 5 percent of the total, at the time of the First NPC. By the Eighth NPC, the number of women standing committee members had increased to 19, rising to 12.3 percent. From 1954 to 1993, eight women served as vice-chairpersons of the NPC Standing Committee. They include Soong Ching Ling, He Xiangning, Cai Chang and Chen Muhua.
　　人大女代表在立法以及国家和社会事务管理中发挥了重要作用。她们尤其关注教育卫生、生态环境、妇女儿童和残疾人权益的保护、社会治安和社会风气等问题，积极提出立法和政策建议，努力促进这些方面的进步与发展。《妇女权益保障法》等一些法律的制定就是在女代表的提议和参与下实现的。
Women deputies to people's congresses at various levels have played an important role in legislative work and the administration of other state and social affairs. They pay particular attention to the problems of education and public health, the ecological environment, the protection of the rights and interests of women, children and the disabled, social stions for legislation and policy-making and working hard to promote advances in these fields. The enactment of the Law on the Protection of the Rights and Interests of Women and many other laws were made on the basis of motions put forward by women and with their participation.
　　中国妇女积极参加政治协商会议活动。1993年召开的第八届全国政协会议的委员中，有女委员283人、女常委29人，分别占委员和常委总数的13.52%和9.2%。参加政协的女委员都是社会各界的优秀人士，具有广泛的代表性。她们从不同角度对国家大事和政府工作提出意见，进行协商，发挥民主监督作用。邓颖超、康克清、钱正英等7位女性曾分别担任过全国政协主席、副主席。
Chinese women take an active part in the activities of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) at various levels. In the Eighth National Committee of the CPPCC held in 1993, women accounted for 283 of the members and 29 of the standing committee members, making up 13.52 percent and 9.2 percent of their respective totals. Women members of the CPPCC are outstanding figures from all walks of life, and provide wide representation. From their different vantage points, they express their opinions on national affairs and government work, render consultation and carry out democratic supervision. Deng Yingchao, Kang Keqing and Qian Zhengying had been or is currently among the seven women serving as chairperson or vice-chairperson of the CPPCC National Committee.
　　中国共产党领导的多党合作和政治协商制度是中国的一项基本政治制度。中国共产党中，目前已有女党员700多万人，占党员总数的14%。许多优秀妇女担任了党内各级领导职务。第十四届中央委员会中有24名女中央委员和候补中央委员；中共中央各部正副部长有6位女性。在中国的八个民主党派中，有近11万名女党员，有的党派女党员占41%。八个民主党派的中央领导机构中，女性有203人，八届全国人大常委会副委员长、著名学者和社会活动家雷洁琼女士，即是中国民主促进会的主席。
The system of multi-party cooperation and political consultation under the leadership of the Communist Party of China forms the basic political system of China. At present, the Chinese Communist Party has over 7 million women members, accounting for 14 percent of general membership. Many outstanding women work in various leading posts within the Party. The current 14th CPC Central Committee has 24 women members and alternate members, while six women are now acting as directors or deputy directors of departments under the CPC Central Committee. China's eight democratic parties have some 110,000 women members. In one party, women constitute 41 percent of the membership. There are 203 women in the central leading organs of the eight democratic parties. Madam Lei Jieqiong, vice-chairperson of the Eighth NPC Standing Committee, a noted scholar and social activist, is the chairperson of the Central Committee of the China Association for Promoting Democracy.
　　参加政府工作是中国妇女参与国家和社会事务管理的重要途径。建国以来，曾有一位女性担任过国家副主席、名誉主席，有两位女性担任过国务院副总理，两位女性担任过国务委员。中国的改革开放政策不但促进了经济发展和社会进步，而且为妇女参政进一步创造了条件。1993年，国家机关工作人员中妇女已占32.44%。1994年国务院各部委有女正副部长16名，全国有女省长、副省长18名。在全国517个城市中，有300多名女性当选为正副市长。
Participation in government work is an important channel for women to play their role in the administration of state and social affairs. Since the founding of the People's Republic, one woman had served one term as vice-chairperson and later honorary president of the country, two women have served as vice-premiers of the State Council, and two have been state councilors. China's policies of reform and opening to the outside world not only have promoted economic development and social progress, but have also prepared better conditions for women to participate in government and political affairs. In 1993, women made up 32.44 percent of all people working in government organs. At present, the various ministries and commissions under the State Council have 16 female ministers and vice-ministers, and the country has 18 female provincial governors and deputy governors. In the nation's 517 cities, more than 300 women have been elected mayor or deputy mayor.
　　中国妇女是加强法制建设、维护国家安全的重要力量。在司法机构中有一大批女法官、女检察官、女律师。1992年，全国有女法官21012名，女律师4512名。
Women play an important role in strengthening legislative construction and safeguarding state security. China's judicial organs have a large number of women judges, procurators and lawyers. In 1992, the country boasted 21,012 female judges and 4,512 women lawyers.
　　广大妇女关心国家大事，关心政府工作，积极参政议政。自1953年第一次基层人民代表选举开始，历次换届中妇女参选比例都在90%以上，1984年以来则高达95%。妇女除经常通过各种群众组织反映意愿和要求外，还用信访方式就政府工作和社会问题向有关部门提出意见和建议，并通过新闻媒介表达对各种问题的看法。
Ordinary women in general also show concern for national affairs and government work. There is increasing enthusiasm on their part to involve themselves in government and political affairs. In all general elections since 1953, when the first general election was held for deputies to grass-roots people's congresses, over 90 percent of women had exercised their voting rights. Since 1984, the rate has risen to 95 percent. Apart from frequently making their voices heard through mass organizations, women also vent their opinions and raise their suggestions on government work and social issues by writing to or calling at relevant government offices or through the mass media.
　　各级妇女联合会代表各族各界妇女对国家社会事务进行民主管理和民主监督，这是中国妇女参与政治的重要途径之一。在中国，妇联组织能够代表妇女参与人大和政府制定涉及妇女切身利益的法律、法规工作，并监督法律法规的实施。妇联组织可以建议政府有关部门下发关于解决妇女问题的政策性文件，也可以向国家机关、社会团体和企事业单位推荐女干部。
Women of all ethnic groups and from all walks of life realize their democratic participation in and supervision over state and social affairs through women's federations at various levels. This is one of the important channels of women participation in political affairs in China. On behalf of women, these federations play a part in the making of laws and regulations related to the vital interests of women by the people's congresses and governments, and supervise their implementation. They can propose to relevant government departments that they issue policy documents for the settlement of womenrelated problems that emerge. They can also recommend women cadres to government organs, social organizations, enterprises and institutions.
　　中国共产党和中国政府把妇女参政作为中国民主建设的一项重要内容。为了改善女干部成长的外部环境，提高妇女参政比例，确保妇女真正享有宪法赋予的政治权利，党和政府多次专门就培养选拔女干部工作发了文件，召开会议，做出一系列规定。目前全国已有23个省(自治区、直辖市)、244个地(市、州、盟)、2106个县(旗、区)的党政领导班子中有了女性领导人。为促进民族平等、团结、进步和各民族共同繁荣，政府特别重视培养少数民族女干部，建立少数民族学校，举办少数民族妇女干部培训班，选送少数民族妇女进修学习，促进少数民族女干部的迅速成长。到1992年，全国已有少数民族女干部60.76万人，占全国少数民族干部总数的26.6%；第八届全国人民代表大会代表中，有少数民族女代表106人，占女代表总数的17%，而且有三位少数民族妇女当选为八届全国人大常委会委员。少数民族女干部已成为少数民族地区政治、经济、社会发展的骨干力量。
The Chinese Communist Party and the Chinese government consider the participation of women in government and political affairs an important component part of the building of democracy in China. They have issued special documents and called meetings for improving the external environment for women cadres, so as to raise the ratio of women participating in political affairs and ensure that women really enjoy the political rights written in the Constitution. These documents and meetings deal with the work of training and selecting cadres from among women. A whole series of regulations have been issued to this effect. At present, there are women in the Party and government leading bodies of 23 provinces (autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the central government), 244 prefectures (cities, autonomous prefectures and leagues) and 2,106 counties (districts and banners). In order to promote equality, unity, progress and common prosperity among all ethnic groups, the government attaches particular attention to training women cadres of ethnic minorities, and has established schools for these minorities, run training classes for their women cadres and offer opportunities for them to go on to advanced studies. This has promoted a rapid growth of ethnic minority women cadres. By 1992, the number of minority women cadres nationwide reached 607,600, accounting for 26.6 percent of all minority cadres in the country. Among deputies to the Eighth NPC, 106 are female deputies from ethnic minorities, accounting for 17 percent of all women deputies. Moreover, three minority women were elected members of the Eighth NPC Standing Committee. Cadres from minority nationalities have become a backbone force in the political, economic and social development of minority areas.
　　中国政府正在制定《中国妇女发展规划》，以进一步推动妇女参政和全面参与发展。
The Chinese government is now working on the Program for the Development of Chinese Women, which is aimed at further promoting women's participation in government and political affairs as well as their overall participation and development.
在社会生活领域中充分发展
Full Advance in Society
在旧中国，广大妇女被排斥在社会生活之外。新中国，妇女在社会生活各个方面，特别是在教育、科技、文化体育、卫生等领域，获得了令人瞩目的发展。
In old China, women were excluded from social life. New China has enabled women to make conspicuous progress in all aspects of society, especially in the fields of education, science and technology, culture, sports and public health.
　　中国政府大力发展妇女教育事业。在正规教育中，国家积极采取措施，提高女性入学率、在学率和升学率。在部分边远、贫困和少数民族地区，采取办女童班、办女校、实行免费上学等办法，努力消除女性受教育的障碍。1992年，中国7—11周岁女儿童入学率由建国前的不足20%提高到96.2%；中学生、大学生及研究生中的女性比例分别达到43.1%、33.7%和24.8%，在大学工科毕业生中女性也达到27%。自1982年恢复学位制到1993年，中国已有1149名女性获得了博士学位，占博士总数的9.4%。中国政府还特别注意发展妇女成人教育、职业技术教育和扫盲教育。目前，全国已建立了1679所女子中等职业学校和3所女子职业大学，开设了60多个适合妇女的专业，有1300多万妇女在成人高校学习。建国四十多年来，累计扫除女性文盲1.1亿人，使女性文盲比例从1949年的90%下降到1993年的32%。
The Chinese government has exerted great efforts to promote women's education. In regular education, the state has adopted measures to increase the proportion of female enrollment. In some remote, poverty-stricken areas and ethnic minority areas, there are free courses and schools specially for women as a measure to remove barriers to female education. In 1992, the attendance rate for girls from 7 to 11 years old had risen to 96.2 percent from less than 20 percent before the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949. The proportion of females in middle schools, colleges and postgraduate schools reached 43.1 percent, 33.7 percent and 24.8 percent respectively. Among engineering college graduates, women accounted for 27 percent. From 1982, when the academic degree system was resumed, to 1993, 1,149 women were awarded doctorates, making up 9.4 percent of total Ph.D recipients.The Chinese government has also paid special attention to promoting adult and vocational education and eliminating illiteracy among women. There are 1,679 women's secondary vocational schools and three women's vocational colleges, which offer more than 60 specialties suitable for women. Over 13 million women are enrolled in institutions of higher learning. Over a period of 45 years since the founding of the People's Republic, more than 110 million women illiterates have been taught to read, reducing the female illiteracy rate from 90 percent in 1949 to 32 percent in 1993.
　　中国妇女为教育事业的发展作出了积极的贡献。1992年，各级各类学校中女教师占教师总数的比例为30%至44.5%。北京大学是中国著名的高等学府，在近3000名教师中，约三分之一是女性，其中有19位博士生导师、68位教授、300多位副教授。全国有20多位女性担任了大学的校长、副校长。1990年全国评选出的5万名特级教师中，女教师占70%。1993年，全国共表彰、奖励“全国教育系统优秀教师和教育工作者”5971人，其中女性1702人，占总数的28.5%；评选出“全国教育系统劳动模范”592人，其中女性150人，占总数的25.3%。
Chinese women have made active contributions to education. In 1992, women teachers at all levels made up 30-44.5 percent of teachers nationwide. In Beijing University, the most distinguished university of China, about one-third of the 3,000 academics are female. Among them, 19 are tutors of postgraduate candidates, 68 are professors and more than 300 are associate professors. Over 20 women across the country assume the posts of university president or vice-president. In 1990, 50,000 teachers were cited for having made outstanding contributions. Seventy percent of them were women. In 1993, 5,971 people were cited as exemplary teachers and education workers in the national education system, among them 1,702 being women, or 28.5 percent of the total. Of the 592 model workers in the national education system, women accounted for 150, or 25.3 percent of the total.
　　中国政府重视对女科技人员的培养，致力于改善她们的工作和生活条件，鼓励和扶持她们进行科学研究。不少妇女跨进了高能物理、遗传工程、微电子技术、卫星发射等尖端科学技术领域，与男科学家一道取得了突破性成果。1993年，中国已有女科技人员809.7万人，占科技人员总数的35%。在中国科学院，女性担任研究室主任的有186人，占11.9%；任课题组长的有514人，占14.8%。在中国医学科学院具有高级专业技术职称的科学家中，女性占40%以上；院级112个重点科研课题中，女课题负责人占47.3%。1993年，有29名妇女荣任中国科学院院士，占总数的5.4%。截止1992年，有204名妇女成为国家级专家，占总数的5.7%。在享受政府特殊津贴的专家、学者中，女性有11374人，约占总数的10%。中国妇女已成为科技界一支重要力量。
The Chinese government has attached great importance to training women scientists and technicians, trying to improve their working and living conditions and encouraging and supporting them in their scientific research. Many women have stepped into the frontiers of science and technology in areas such as high-energy physics, genetic engineering, microelectronics and satellite launching. Together with male scientists, they have achieved many breakthroughs. In 1993, China had 8,097,000 women scientists and technicians, making up 35 percent of the total. In the Chinese Academy of Sciences, there are 186 women directors of research centers, accounting for 11.9 percent of all directors. As to leaders of research teams, 514, or 14.8 percent of them are women. In the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, women make up over 40 percent of scientists with senior professional titles, and 47.3 percent of the 112 academy-level key research projects are in the charge of women. Up to 1993, the Chinese Academy of Sciences had selected 29 women as academicians, making up 5.4 percent of the total. By 1992, 204 women had become state-level experts, accounting for 5.7 percent of all such experts in the country. Among specialists and scholars who enjoy special government allowances, 11,374, or 10 percent of the total, are women. Chinese women have become a significant force in scientific and technological circles.
　　中国妇女的聪明才智在文化艺术领域得到充分的发挥。中国作家协会、电影家协会、美术家协会、民间文学研究会等12个全国性的文学艺术团体中，女会员十分活跃，比例最高的占41.8%。女性作家、表演艺术家、画家、导演和音乐家不断涌现。改革开放以来，中国文坛上女作家群的出现，给文字创作带来了前所未有的繁荣。1980年至1988年在芭蕾舞、钢琴、小提琴、声乐等国际艺术比赛中，女性获奖者占中国获奖者的50%以上，其中女杂技演员获奖人数占70%以上。
Chinese women have exhibited their acumen and talents in the arts and culture. In 12 cultural organizations, such as the Chinese Writers' Association, the China Film Association, the Chinese Artists' Association and the China Society for the Study of Folk Literature and Art, women members are quite active and their proportion hits 41.8 percent at the highest. Women writers, performers, painters, directors and musicians are constantly emerging. Since China implemented its reform and opening up policies, the emergence of a galaxy of women writers has brightened the literary scene. At international ballet, piano, violin and vocal music competitions, women made up over 50 percent of Chinese prize winners. With acrobats, it is over 70 percent.
　　中国政府积极创造条件使妇女与男子一样有参加各种体育训练和国际比赛的机会。女运动员在国际运动场上锐意进取，成绩辉煌。1985年到1993年，中国有国际级女运动健将404人，占中国国际级运动健将总数的51%。从新中国成立到1993年，中国运动员共获世界冠军775个，其中女子冠军460个，占总数的59%；中国运动员打破和超过世界纪录725次，其中女运动员458次，占总次数的63%。在1992年的第二十五届奥运会上，中国女运动员共夺得12枚金牌，占中国获金牌总数的四分之三。中国女运动员不畏艰苦、顽强拼博的精神，体现了中华儿女的时代风貌。
The Chinese government takes active measures to create favorable conditions for women participation in physical training and international matches. With their enterprising spirit, women athletes have done brilliantly in the global sports arena. From 1985 to 1993, China had 404 top sportswomen at international level, accounting for 51 percent of all Chinese athletes at that rank. Between 1949 and 1993, Chinese athletes won 775 world championships, of which 460, or 59 percent, were won by women; Chinese athletes broke world records 725 times, with women accounting for 458 of these, or about 63 percent of the total. At the 25th Olympic Games held in 1992, Chinese women athletes scooped 12 gold medals, taking three quarters of the golds for China. The indomitable and tenacious character displayed by Chinese women athletes embody the new look of the Chinese nation.
　　在医疗卫生事业中，中国妇女做出了突出贡献。到1993年，中国已有妇幼卫生专业技术人员227万人，占全部医务人员总数的55%。曾任中国医学科学院副院长、中华医学会妇产科学会主任委员的林巧稚，医术精湛，医德高尚，生前长期从事妇产科的教学、科研和妇女常见病、多发病的普查普治工作，是开拓中国现代妇产科学、弘扬救死扶伤的人道主义精神的杰出典型。改革开放十五年来，中国有382项医学科学技术成果获国家级奖励，其中由女性独立完成的占四分之一，女性参与完成的占50%以上。从1983年到目前，中国有15位女性获得国际护士最高荣誉奖章——南丁格尔奖。
Women have made outstanding contributions to the nation's medical and health services. By 1993, China had 2.27 million medical workers specializing in maternity and child care, accounting for 55 percent of all those in the medical profession. The late Lin Qiaozhi, who possessed superb medical skills and high medical ethics, was vice-president of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and the head of the Society of Gynaecology and Obstetrics of the Chinese Medical Association. She long engaged in gynaecological and obstetrics teaching and research, conducting general surveys and curing common and recurring women's illnesses. She contributed significantly to China's modern gyniatrics and set an excellent example of humanitarianism in healing the wounded and rescuing the dying.In the 15 years since the reform and opening up, 382 achievements in medical sciences have been honored with state-level awards. More than 50 percent of these achievements were made with the participation of women and a quarter have been independently accomplished by females. From 1983 till now, 15 Chinese women have won the Nightingale Medal, the world's top honor for nurses.
　　中国妇女在促进社会文明与道德进步、维护社会稳定方面发挥了不可替代的作用。
Women have played an irreplaceable role in enhancing social morality, improving social environment and maintaining social stability.
　　遍布中国城镇的居民委员会，是群众性的自治组织，它的一项重要职责就是调解邻里纠纷。担任这一工作的绝大部分是妇女。她们耐心细致、尽心尽力地为街坊邻居排解矛盾，制止了大量可能激化为刑事案件的民间纠纷，促进了邻里之间的团结和睦。许多妇女主动配合政府做失足人员的帮教工作。早在建国初期，就有不少热心社会公益的妇女利用节假日到监狱看望素不相识的罪犯，给他们写信，鼓励他们服刑期间好好改造，重新做人。近几年，参与这一活动的妇女越来越多，以妇女为主的帮教小组就有几万个。帮教小组不仅做失足青年的思想转化工作，还努力帮助刑满释放入员解决就业和婚姻问题。中国是世界上刑事犯罪发案率和重新犯罪率最低的国家之一，这与妇女所起的作用是分不开的。
Neighborhood committees can be found in cities and towns all over the country. These are autonomous popular organizations and one of their major duties is to mediate in neighborhood disputes. Most of the active members are women. With all their heart and soul, they perform patient and painstaking work to settle disputes among their neighbors. In doing so, they quash numerous civil quarrels that might otherwise develop into criminal cases and thus promote harmony among residents.Women take the initiative in helping the government in its efforts to educate people who have taken a wrong step in life. From the very early days after the founding of the People's Republic, many public-spirited women visited prisons on their days off to see criminals whom they had never met. They wrote to felons and encouraged them to rehabilitate themselves during their time inside and try to turn over a new leaf. In the last few years, more and more women have been participating in this type of activity. There are many thousands of "assistance and education teams" across the country, mainly composed of women. These groups not only help young wrong-doers to remould their thinking, but also try to find jobs and spouses for them on their release. China is among countries with the lowest incidence of crime and recidivism. This fact is closely related to the efforts of women.
　　中国妇女积极响应政府关于倡导文明科学进步生活方式的号召，热心于社会公益事业。在众多的敬老院和社会福利院服务的大都是妇女，她们像照顾自己的亲人一样照顾年迈的老人和年幼的孩子。在广大城市和乡村，还有许多妇女义务赡养孤寡老人和收养孤儿。一些城镇退休妇女也主动承担起社区服务工作，兴办托儿所、快餐店、代销店，设立卫生监督岗等，受到社会欢迎。在许多地方，妇女自愿组织禁赌协会，挽救了一些因赌博而濒临破裂的家庭，促进了民风和社会风气的好转。
Responding to the government call for a cultured, scientific and progressive life style, women show great enthusiasm in public welfare work. Most of those who serve in old folks' homes and social welfare institutions are women. They treat elders and youngsters like their own kith and kin. In numerous cities and villages, many women voluntarily take it upon themselves to support and care for aged widows and widowers or adopt orphans. In cities and towns, retired women take over community services on their own initiative. They set up nurseries, snack bars, sales commission agencies and hygiene supervision posts, which are welcomed by the society. In many places, women volunteer to organize associations to ban gambling and thus save many families on the verge of disintegration, promoting a favorable turn in civil practices and the general mood of society.
　　由于历史的原因和社会经济文化水平的制约，中国妇女在参与社会生活方面还存在一些不容忽视的问题，特别是多数妇女受教育程度还较低，女童受教育的权利在部分农村特别是边远地区尚未得到充分保障。目前，政府和社会团体正在采取措施解决这些问题。
Owing to historical reasons and the constraints of the level of social, economic and cultural development, some problems continue to impede women's full participation in social life and must not be ignored. In particular, the majority of women have a low level of education and in some rural areas, especially in remote or border regions, female children are not being fully guaranteed their right to education. The government and social organizations are adopting measures to overcome these inadequacies.

婚姻家庭领域中的平等地位
Equal Status in Marriage and Family Life

新中国使延续了几千年的封建婚姻家庭制度成为了历史，以爱情为基础的自主婚姻和男女平等的家庭生活已成为当代中国婚姻家庭的主流。

　　The founding of New China put an end to the feudal marital and family system that had endured for several millennia. Independent marriage based on mutual love and a family life in which husband and wife are equal have become the main current in contemporary Chinese Society.

　　中国妇女获得了婚姻自主权。
Women have gained the right of self-determination in marriage.
在旧中国，95%以上的婚姻是包办买卖婚姻。
In old China, over 95 percent of marriages were arranged and on a monetary basis.
四十多年来，中国自主婚姻的程度已大大提高。据抽样调查，目前由男女双方自己决定或与父母共同商定的婚姻占74%，40岁以下的已婚妇女自主婚姻率为80%。妇女离婚和再婚的权利也得到了应有的保障。这不仅促进了婚姻质量的提高和家庭的稳定，也为家庭中夫妻关系的平等奠定了感情基础。

Over the last 40-odd years, the degree of freedom in choosing a partner has in- 37creased significantly. Sample investigations show that 74 percent of young couples make the decision themselves to wed or do so after consultation with their parents, and 80 percent of marriages of women under 40 years old are based on their own choice. Women's rights with regard to divorce and remarriage are also duly guaranteed. This fact has helped improve the quality of marriage and enhance family stability. In addition, it lays an emotional foundation for equality between husband and wife in the family.

　　独立的姓名权是中国妇女获得的一项重要人身权利。
Chinese women have gained the important personal right of being able to retain their maiden names. 
在旧中国，男性姓氏是家族传宗接代的标志，女性出嫁前大多没有正式名字，出嫁后随夫姓，子女则随父姓。
In old China, surnames symbolized the continuity of a clan. Most women had no formal name before marriage. They adopted their husband's surname after they wed and children used their father's surname. 
新中国，夫妻有了平等的姓名权，子女随父姓的旧习俗也有了变化。
In New China, both husband and wife have equal right to use their own names and children do not have to adopt their father's surname as was the former custom. 
在中国城市，子女随母姓的现象已为数不少。
In cities, quite a few children take their mother's surname.

　　中国妇女经济的自立促进了妇女家庭地位的改善。
Women's economic independence has promoted their status in the family. 
在旧中国，绝大多数家庭由男人当家。
In old China, family heads were pre-dominantly men. 
在新中国，妇女通过劳动有了独立的经济收入。
In New China, women earn their own income through work.
目前，中国妇女的收入占家庭总收入的比例已由50年代的20%提高到40%，有的家庭特别是农村以妇女为主的专业户家庭，妇女收入的比例甚至高达60%至70%。经济的独立，使妇女赢得了对家庭重大事务的管理决策权。据抽样调查，在中国城乡，由夫妻共同决定家庭重大事务的家庭占58%以上，并且呈不断上升的趋势。

The share of women's earnings in total family income has risen from 20 percent in the 1950s to the present 40 percent. In some families, especially rural households which are headed by women and which specialize in certain areas of production, the money brought in by women makes up as much as 60-70 percent of the family total. As they have become economically independent, Chinese women have gained more management and decision-making power in principal family and economic matters. Sample investigations show that in over 58 percent of urban and rural families, major affairs are decided by the husband and wife together. This figure continues to climb.

中国妇女与男子一样获得了家庭财产的所有权和继承权。
Women enjoy the same rights of possession and inheritance of family property as men. 
在旧中国，家庭财产只能由男性占有和继承，寡妇再嫁不得带走财产，出嫁的女儿也不能继承父母遗产。
In old China, family assets could only be owned and inherited by men. If a widow remarried, she could take nothing and a married daughter had no right to inherit anything from her parents. 
现在的绝大多数家庭，夫妻同是家庭财产的所有者，平等地支配和使用家庭财产。
Nowadays, in the overwhelming majority of families, husband and wife jointly own family property and they have equal access to its use and allocation.
夫妻相互继承遗产和子女平等继承父母遗产的权利普遍得到了保障。
It has become common practice for husband and wife to enjoy the same bequeathment rights and for sons and daughters to have equal rights as heirs.

　　中国家庭的人际关系发生了历史性变化，以夫权和家长制为代表的传统家庭关系已逐步被平等、民主、和睦的现代家庭关系所代替，在中国城乡家庭中，夫妻之间，公婆与儿媳之间的关系是平等的，妻子受丈夫虐待、儿媳受公婆虐待的现象已为社会所不容。妇女的人格、学习、劳动权利以及理想、追求，普遍受到了丈夫和其他家人的尊重。过去，家务劳动全部由妻子承担；现在，由夫妻双方共同承担家务劳动的家庭，已占中国家庭的绝大多数。夫妻在事业上相互支持，在生活上相互帮助，出现了许许多多互敬互爱、携手共进的好家庭。

　　Historical changes have taken place in family relationship. The traditional family characterized by the authority of husband and patriarchal system has gradually been replaced by the modern family mode, marked by equality and a democratic and harmonious atmosphere. In both urban and rural areas, the relationships between husband and wife and between parents-in-law and daughter-in-law are equal. There is social disapproval of ill-treatment meted out to wives and daughters-in-law. Women's personal dignity, their rights to education and work as well as their ideals and pursuits, are generally respected by their husbands and other family members. In the past, a wife took on all the housework. Nowadays, in most Chinese families, husband and wife share this task together. They support each other in their careers and help each other in everyday life. In China, such families with close emotional ties are emerging in large numbers.

　　中国现有2.67亿个家庭，每年约有1000万对新婚夫妇组成新家庭。中国政府一贯主张保护婚姻家庭，强调夫妻平等，倡导家庭和睦、尊老爱幼的中华民族传统。目前，中国的离婚率为1.54‰。由于中国家庭基本稳定，使家庭安排生活、教养子女、赡养老人的多方面职能充分体现，中国多数老年人得到了子女和社会的照料与扶助。

　　China has 267 million families and every year about 10 million newlywed couples join their ranks. The Chinese government has consistently protected marriage and the family, emphasized equality between husband and wife, and fostered the Chinese national tradition of respect for the old, love for the young and harmonious relations in the family. Currently, the divorce rate in China is 1.54 per thousand. Because Chinese families are basically stable, family functions, such as living arrangements, child rearing and support for the elderly, are fully in evidence. Most of the elderly enjoy support and care from their children as well as society.
中国政府重视家庭建设，把家庭的稳定与进步作为促进社会稳定与进步的基础。各级政府把家庭文化建设纳入本地区精神文明建设的总体规划，开展了大量富有成效的工作。许多地方建立了敬老协会、道德协会、红白理事会等，有效地改进了家风、村风。多年来在中国城乡兴起的创建文明家庭、美好家庭活动和各类家庭文化建设活动，对提高家庭成员整体素质，促进家庭民主、夫妻和谐和家庭人际关系的改善起到了积极作用。

　　The Chinese government pays much attention to the building of families and considers family stability and progress to be the basis for social stability and progress. Governments at all levels list enhancement of family cultural levels in their overall planning for local cultural and ideological advance. Much effective work has been done in this regard. Associations for respect of the elderly and for fostering of morals, and wedding and funeral councils have been set up in many places, effectively improving the general family and village atmosphere. Over the years, campaigns to create civilized and fine families and various other related activities have been launched in urban and rural areas. They have helped improve the overall attributes of family members and promote family democracy and harmony, between husband and wife and among all members.

　　中国政府大力发展各种社会福利事业，努力推进家务劳动社会化的进程。国家重视并支持地方开展社区服务，兴办了大批便民利民的服务网点，大力发展食品、蔬菜、商业、煤气、轻工业品等与日常生活相关的产业。目前，多种形式、多种项目的家务劳动服务设施，正在中国城乡迅速发展。全国各级各类托儿所、幼儿园有近45万所，入园入托率城市达70%，农村达2%。方便食品、家用电器等已逐步进入家庭。就业妇女的家务劳动时间普遍降低。城市职业妇女家务劳动日均3.75小时，已接近发达国家妇女家务劳动的平均时间。

　　The Chinese government has made significant efforts to promote social welfare undertakings and accelerate the socialization of housework. The state encourages and supports efforts to expand community services. Handy help networks have been set up in large numbers, and efforts are made to develop branches that are closely related to daily life -- foodstuffs, vegetables, commerce, gas and light industrial products. Currently, various housework service facilities are surging in urban and rural China. There are 450,000 nurseries and kindergartens nationwide. The entrance rate to these reaches 70 percent of pre-school age children in towns and 32 percent in the countryside. Convenience foods and electrical household appliances are finding their way into families. As a result, the average time women spend on housework daily has generally decreased. In cities, professional women put an average of 3.75 hours into household chores. This is almost equivalent to the time spent on such tasks by their female counterparts in developed countries.

中国妇女的生育自主权得到了应有的保障。
Women's rights to decide whether or not to bear children are duly protected.
在旧中国，妇女是生育的工具，因不育或没有生男孩而被公婆歧视、被丈夫遗弃的现象比较普遍。
In old China, women were just child bearing tools, and they were often persecuted by their parents-in-law or abandoned by their husbands because they were unable to provide any offspring, let alone a son. 
新中国，妇女成了生育的主人，可以同丈夫平等地商议决定生与不生。历史上曾深受早婚和多子女拖累之苦的中国妇女，对国家实行的计划生育政策表现了极大的热情，绝大多数人自愿晚婚晚育，少生优育。目前，中国已婚妇女的避孕率达83%，有的地区达90%以上。1992年中国人口出生率为18.24‰，人口自然增长率为11.6%，比1970年分别下降了45.4%和55%，总和生育率也由1970年的5.81降至2.0左右。
In New China, women are in control of their own child bearing and they can discuss with their spouses whether or not they will go through with a pregnancy. Historically, Chinese women were victims of early marriage and burdened by excessive numbers of offspring. They display great enthusiasm for the state's family planning policy and the overwhelming majority of them are willing to marry late and have children late, and to have fewer children so as to guarantee a better quality of life for them. The contraception rate among married women reaches 83 percent in the country as a whole, and over 90 percent in some places. In 1992, the birth rate for the Chinese population was 18.24 per thousand and the natural population growth rate was 11.6 per thousand, representing respective decreases of 45.4 percent and 55 percent over 1970. In the same period, the gross fertility rate fell from 5.81 to about 2.0.

中国妇女的生育健康受到国家的保护。
Maternal health is protected by the state.
在旧中国，没有专门的妇幼保健院，因孕产期病或其他妇女病丧失生命的妇女不计其数。
In old China, since there were no maternity and child care centers, countless women died from pregnancy complications or other gynaecological complaints. 
新中国十分重视并积极发展妇幼保健事业。各级政府都设有妇幼卫生管理职能部门，城乡逐级建立了妇幼保健院所。到1992年底，中国已有妇幼保健院346所，妇幼保健所2841所，儿童医院34所，初步形成了覆盖全国城乡的妇幼保健网。目前，城市98%和农村70%的孕产妇能获得产前检查，全国新法接生率达84.1%。与建国初期相比，孕产妇死亡率由1500/10万下降到94.7/10万，婴儿死亡率由200‰下降到31.42‰。一些威胁妇女健康的常见病、多发病得到了有效防治，每年接受预防性普查的妇女近4000万人。针对少数民族地区卫生和医护条件差、妇女患病率高的状况，国家特别重视发展少数民族地区的妇女保健事业，大力普及新法接生、妇幼保健、多发病防治和生活卫生常识，积极开展对民族地区妇幼保健医护人员和接生员的培训工作。各级政府还经常组织医学专家、医务人员到农牧区和少数民族聚居区进行巡回医疗。为保障少数民族妇女的健康，国家对西藏等地区的妇女普遍实行免费医疗。目前，中国妇女的平均预期寿命已由旧中国的36.7岁提高到72岁，与中国男性相比高出3岁，比联合国提出的2000年世界妇女平均预期寿命65岁的目标高出7岁。

New China has devoted much effort to developing health care for women and children. Governments at all levels have special functional departments in charge of maternity and child hygiene. Health centers in this regard have been set up at all levels in both urban and rural areas. By the end of 1992, China had 346 maternity and children's health care centers, 2,841 clinics and 34 pediatric hospitals, initially forming a national health network for women and children. At present, 98 percent of pregnant women in urban areas and 70 percent in rural areas can receive prenatal examinations. Modern methods are adopted for 84.1 percent of deliveries in China. Compared with the early days after the founding of New China, the mortality rate for pregnant and lying-in women has dropped from 1,500 per hundred thousand to about 94.7 per hundred thousand, and the infant mortality rate has fallen from 200 per thousand to 31.42 per thousand. Some common ailments and frequently-occurring diseases that threaten female health have effectively been prevented or put under control. Every year close to 40 million women receive preventive health checks. In the light of the poor hygienic and medical conditions and high incidence of disease in ethnic minority areas, the state has attached great importance to developing women's health care facilities there. Enormous efforts have been put into popularizing modern delivery methods, health care for women and children, prevention and control of frequently-occurring diseases and elementary knowledge of hygiene and sanitation. Much has been done to train mid-wives and gynecological and pediatric medical workers. In addition, authorities at all levels often organize mobile medical teams to visit farming and pastoral areas and other ethnic communities. Free medical care for women is provided in Tibet and other regions. Thanks to all these efforts, the average life expectancy of Chinese women has risen from 36.7 years in old China to the present 72 years. This is three years above the figure for Chinese men and seven years higher than the average life expectancy of 65 years set as a goal by the United Nations for the women of the world by the year 2000.

　　由于封建传统观念的影响和各地经济文化发展的不平衡，在中国农村特别是比较偏僻落后的农村，还残存着少数包办买卖婚姻的陋习，溺弃女婴、拐卖妇女的案件也时有发生。中国政府非常重视这些问题，大力宣传男女平等的思想，教育妇女学会运用法律武器保护自己；严厉打击各种残害妇女的违法犯罪活动，保障妇女的正当权益不受侵犯。

　　However, in spite of all these achievements, the influence of feudal concepts and regional imbalances in economic and cultural development continues to show their effect. The bad habits of arranged and mercenary marriage linger on in some rural areas, especially in the outlying and backward spots. Cases of drowning and abandonment of female infants and trafficking in women occur from time to time. The Chinese government is paying close attention to these problems. It is vigorously advocating the equality of the sexes and educating women to use legal weapons to defend themselves. Strong measures have been adopted against unlawful cruel treatment of women to ensure that their legitimate rights and interests are not infringed upon.

中国妇女权益的组织保障
Organizational Guarantees of the Rights and Interests of Chinese Women
　　在中国，保障妇女的合法权益是全社会的共同责任。国家机关、社会团体、企事业单位、城乡基层群众性组织，从自己的工作职能和任务出发，依法维护和保障妇女权益。
Guarantees for the legal rights and interests of women are an issue of common concern in China. Government organs, social organizations, enterprises and institutions, and rural and urban mass groups at the grass roots have all made efforts to this effect in line with the laws and regulations.
　　中国的各级人民代表大会负责制定和修改有关保护妇女权益的法律、法规，监督有关法律的实施及政府保障妇女权益方面的工作。为切实保障妇女儿童权益，全国人民代表大会内务司法委员会及16个省、自治区、直辖市的人民代表大会常委会成立了妇女儿童专门小组，负责办理有关事务。中国人民政治协商会议的各级委员会对有关妇女权益保障的立法及其实施情况进行民主监督、政治协商，就有关妇女的重大问题进行调查研究，提出意见和建议。全国政协及部分省、市政协还设立了妇女青年委员会。
People's congresses at all levels are responsible for drafting and revising laws and statutes to protect women's rights and interests. They supervise the implementation of relevant laws and governmental work to safeguard the position of women and children. To ensure the task is performed well, the Committee for Internal and Judicial Affairs under the National People's Congress (NPC) and the standing committees of 16 provincial, autonomous, and municipal people's congresses have established special departments to handle matters concerning women and children. Committees at all echelons of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) carry out democratic supervision and provide political consultation on legislations concerning women's rights and interests and their implementation. They conduct surveys of major problems connected with women, and submit their opinions and suggestions for resolving them. The National CPPCC and its counterparts in some provinces and municipalities have also established committees for women and youth.
　　中国的各级人民政府及政府各部门负责制定和修改有关的行政法规，发布有关决定和命令，把发展妇女事业纳入社会发展计划，采取行政措施，领导和管理妇女权益保障工作。各级司法机关按照法律程序，审理和判决各类案件，打击侵犯妇女权益的犯罪分子，保障有关法律的执行。为更好地协调和推动政府各部门做好妇女权益的保障工作，国务院成立了由16个部委和4个群众组织的负责人组成的国务院妇女儿童工作委员会，全国各省、自治区、直辖市(台湾省除外)一级政府也成立了相应的组织。
People's governments at each level and their departments are responsible for drafting and revising women-related administrative regulations, issuing relevant decisions and orders, linking women's advance with social development, and adopting administrative measures to oversee the protection of women's rights and interests. Judicial bodies at all levels, in accordance with legal procedures, hear and judge cases and punish criminals who infringe on women's rights and interests and see to it that laws are upheld. To coordinate and propel governmental departments in their work of guaranteeing the rights of women, the State Council has established a Work Committee for Women and Children. Its members include leaders from 16 ministries and commissions and four mass organizations. Similar local government bodies have also been set up in all the provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities, with the exception of Taiwan.
　　中国5800多个群众性的妇女组织经常向政府反映广大妇女的意见和面临的问题，提出解决问题的建议。它们是维护妇女权益的重要力量。中华全国妇女联合会是其中最大的组织，该会由中国各族各界妇女联合组织而成，具有广泛的代表性和群众性，拥有健全的工作网络，其基层组织遍布城市的街道和农村的乡村。中华全国妇女联合会以代表和维护广大妇女利益为基本宗旨，致力于促进男女平等，提高妇女地位。妇联以其卓有成效的工作赢得了社会的好评和广大妇女的信赖，许多其他全国性的、地区性的或行业性的妇女组织(如女职工委员会、女科技工作者联议会、基督教女青年会以及女企业家、女工程师、女新闻工作者、女法官、女律师、女作家、女书法家等各种行业的妇女协会等)大多以团体会员的形式，加入中华全国妇女联合会。由于各级妇联在团结妇女参与社会发展和维护妇女权益方面的努力与政府的目标一致，妇联的工作也得到了各级政府的积极支持和鼓励。中国的八个民主党派均设立了妇委会，它们在维护妇女权益方面做了切实有效的工作。
More than 5,800 mass women's organizations in China undertake to report women's views and their problems to the authorities and make suggestions on how to solve them. They are an important force in safeguarding the status of women. The biggest of these is the All-China Women's Federation (ACWF), which comprises women from different ethnic groups and all walks of life. It has broad representation and a popular basis, and furthermore, a sound functional network. Its basic units can be found in urban neighborhoods as well as in villages. Aiming to represent and defend the interests of women, the federation devotes itself to promoting sexual equality and raising women's position in society. Its outstanding work has earned it a high reputation in society and women's confidence. Many other national, regional, and professional women's organizations, such as the Council of Women Workers, the Association of Women Scientific and Technological Workers, the Young Women's Christian Association, and associations of women entrepreneurs, women engineers, women journalists, women judges, lawyers, writers, calligraphers and so on, are affiliated with the federation. As the federation has the same goal as the government, which is to unite women to take part in social development and to defend women's rights and interests, its work is supported and encouraged by the authorities on every rung. The eight democratic parties of China have also set up commissions for women, whose efforts have effectively defended the cause of women.
　　各类宣传媒介、研究机构为保障妇女权益，促进妇女的进步与发展，起到了重要的配合作用。中国的报刊、广播、电视等传媒注重宣传国家有关维护妇女权益的法律法规和文明进步的妇女观，增进全社会对妇女权利、作用的认识。各种妇女群众组织创办了不少妇女报纸刊物，仅各级妇女联合会就有报刊47家。一些综合性的报纸和电台、电视台也辟有妇女专栏，向全社会进行妇女问题的宣传。中国还成立了一些全国性、地方性的妇女问题研究机构，它们的研究成果也促进了保障妇女权益的工作。
Mass media and research institutes play an important role in safeguarding the rights and interests and promoting the advancement of women. The press, radio and television publicize state laws and regulations upholding women's rights and interests and civilized and progressive views on women. This has greatly promoted public awareness of women's rights and contributions to society. Women's organizations have also published many newspapers and magazines for women, the ACWF and its branches alone have 47 periodicals. Some newspapers have special columns on women. Radio and television stations make special women's programs. National and local research institutes on women have been established and their activities help in many ways to protect women's rights and interests.
　　上述这些组织机构相互配合、协调，在消除对妇女的歧视，维护男女平等，提高妇女素质，促进妇女发展等方面，做了大量的工作，取得了积极的成果。
Coordinating their efforts and acting together, the above-mentioned groups have produced positive results in eliminating discrimination against women, upholding equality between men and women, improving women's qualifications and promoting the advancement of women.
　　《中华人民共和国妇女权益保障法》就是在国家权力机关、行政机关及群众团体的共同努力下颁布实施的。该法由中华全国妇女联合会首先倡议，全国人大代表、政协委员以及妇女大会的代表提出议案、提案和建议，得到了全国人大常委会的重视和采纳，并委托全国妇联、民政部和中华全国总工会承担起草任务。全国人大内务司法委员会和国务院妇女儿童工作委员会积极参与了起草工作。该法颁布后，上述各机构还就这部法律的普及和实施，开展了调查和宣传活动。
The Law on the Protection of the Rights and Interests of Women is the product of joint efforts by organs of state power, executive bodies and mass groups. The idea of drafting such a law was first put forward by the All-China Women's Federation. Drafts and proposals to this effect were submitted by deputies to the NPC, members of the CPPCC and representatives to the Women's Congress. The proposal gained the attention and acceptance of the Standing Committee of the NPC, which entrusted the drafting work to the ACWF, the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the All-China Federation of Trade Unions. The Committee for Internal and Judicial Affairs under the National People's Congress and the Work Committee for Women and Children under the State Council also participated. Since the statute was promulgated, these organizations have launched publicity activities and extensive surveys to promote its implementation.
　　针对近年来有的地区重新出现的拐卖妇女儿童及卖淫嫖娼的犯罪活动，1989年国务院发布了《关于坚决打击拐卖妇女儿童犯罪活动的通知》；1991年全国人大根据有关党派、团体的建议，又制定了《严惩卖淫嫖娼的决定》和《严惩拐卖、绑架妇女、儿童的犯罪分子的决定》。有关部门连续召开了三次工作会议，加强了社会治安的综合治理，使上述犯罪活动得到了遏制。1992年中国拐卖人口的案件立案数比1991年下降了35.2%，1993年又比1992年下降了9%。
To stop the abduction and sale of women and children and prostitution, phenomena which have reappeared in some areas in recent years, the State Council issued a Notice on Reprisals Against Trafficking in Women and Children in 1989. In 1991, in response to proposals by some political parties and organizations, the NPC drew up the Decision on the Strict Prohibition Against Prostitution and Whoring and the Decision Regarding the Severe Punishment of the Criminals Who Abduct and Traffic in or Kidnap Women or Children. Government departments involved held three successive work meetings, and as a result, social security was enhanced and felonies checked. In 1992, there was a 35.2 percent reduction in cases of abduction and sale of women and children as compared with 1991, and there was a further drop of 9 percent in 1993.
　　提高妇女素质是保障妇女权益的一项基础性和战略性工作。1989年以来，中华全国妇女联合会联合十几个政府部门，在全国农村各族妇女中开展了“学文化、学技术，比成绩、比贡献”的“双学双比”竞赛活动，在城镇开展了“做‘四有’(有理想、有道德、有文化、有纪律)、‘四自’(自尊、自信、自立、自强)女性，为‘八五’计划建功”的“巾帼建功”活动。到1993年底，全国有1.2亿农村妇女参加“双学双比”活动，其中9000万人接受了各种实用技术培训，1000万妇女在双学中脱盲；51万妇女获得了农民技术员职称；在老少边穷地区，举办了扶贫培训班250期，建立扶贫联系点4500个，联系点的贫困户中80%解决了温饱问题。有3776万城镇妇女参加了“巾帼建功”活动，4672人被评为省级以上“巾帼建功标兵”，15132人获省级以上女能手称号。中国妇女第六次全国代表大会提出的“自尊、自信、自立、自强”的口号及第七次全国代表大会上通过的90年代中国妇女发展的十项目标，在妇女中和社会上产生了广泛影响。亿万妇女在“四自”口号和十项目标的鼓舞和激励下，正在推动社会的发展和进步中实现自身的发展与进步。
Female self-improvement is a strategic task fundamental to the protection of women's rights and interests. Since 1989, the All-China Women's Federation, together with over 10 governmental departments, has launched several campaigns for the betterment of women themselves. One aimed at promoting cultural and technical studies and achievements among women of different ethnic groups in the countryside. By the end of 1993, more than 120 million rural women had joined in and 90 million of them had received practical technical training. Another 10 million had learned to read and write, while 510,000 gained the title of agro-technician. In poverty-stricken areas, mostly old revolutionary bases, ethnic minority areas and border regions, 250 training classes have been held and 4,500 aid stations have been set up to help the impoverished. Nowadays, 80 percent of the poor families covered by these stations have adequate food and clothing. About 37.76 million urban women took part in an ACWF-initiated project to contribute to the Eighth Five-Year Plan, and 4,672 of them were dubbed pacesetters, and another 15,132 were awarded at provincial level or above the title of "Able Woman". The above-mentioned project embraced a call for women to have high ideals, high moral standards, education and discipline (briefly known as "four haves") as well as to strive for self-respect, self-confidence, self-reliance and self-strengthening (briefly known as "four selfs"). The slogan of "four selfs" was first raised at the Sixth National Congress of Women. Then, the Seventh National Congress of Women adopted a 10-Point Goal for the Advancement of Chinese Women in the 1990s. The "four selfs" slogan and the 10-point goal produced a widespread impact upon women and society. Inspired by them, millions of Chinese women are realizing their own betterment and progress in the course of propelling society forward.
积极参与国际妇女活动
Active Participation in International Women's Activities
　　中国承认和尊重《联合国宪章》中关于男女平等的原则，赞赏和支持联合国作出的提高妇女地位、实现男女平等的努力。中国积极参与联合国系统妇女领域的活动，遵照独立自主的和平外交政策，积极发展同世界各国妇女的友好交往与合作，为在全世界实现男女平等、妇女参与社会发展、维护世界和平进行了不懈的努力。
China recognizes and respects the principle of sexual equality affirmed in the United Nations Charter and appreciates and supports UN endeavors to promote the status of women and realize sexual equality. China has taken an active part in international women's activities sponsored by the UN. In accordance with its independent foreign policy of peace, China is striving to develop friendly exchanges and cooperation with women from all over the world, while making unremitting efforts to realize the goal of worldwide equality between men and women, women's participation in social development and maintenance of world peace.
　　1971年10月，联合国恢复中国的合法席位之后，中国积极参与了联合国系统妇女领域的活动。
Since resuming membership in the UN in October 1971, China has shown great enthusiasm in participating in UN activities related to women.
　　中国在联合国系统的有关妇女机构中发挥了积极的作用。中国自1974年以来先后五次当选为联合国妇女地位委员会成员国。中国代表在妇地会的会议上，以不同的形式向各国代表阐述了中国妇女对于维护和平、参与发展、促进男女平等的主张，与各国妇女广泛交流提高妇女地位、发挥妇女作用的经验和信息，增进了相互了解，发展了友好合作关系。1982年以来，中国专家连续四次被选为消除对妇女歧视委员会委员，并积极参与审议各国政府提交的报告，努力促进消除歧视妇女的现象。1985—1988年，中国当选为提高妇女地位国际研究训练所董事会董事，为开展妇女研究和培训工作作出了积极的努力。
China has been playing an active role in UN women's organizations. Since 1974, China has been elected five times as a member state in the UN Commission on the Status of Women. There, Chinese representatives have expounded Chinese women's stand on world peace, participation in development and promotion of sexual equality, exchanged experience and information on promoting women's conditions and giving full play to the role of women with their counterparts from other countries. This has helped to enhance mutual understanding and develop friendly cooperation. Since 1982, Chinese experts have been elected four times in succession as representatives on the Committee on Elimination of Discrimination Against Women and participated in evaluating the reports submitted by governments and made strenuous efforts to eliminate discrimination against women. From 1985 to 1988, China was elected a member of the board of directors of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, where it made positive contributions to women's research and training.
　　中国是1980年首批签署《消除对妇女一切形式歧视公约》的国家之一，并按规定及时提交了执行“公约”情况的报告。中国参与审议和制定了《到2000年提高妇女地位内罗毕前瞻性战略》，并结合本国的具体情况，制定了一系列法律、法规，采取了切实可行的措施，来实现《内罗毕战略》所规定的目标。中国政府一贯实行男女同工同酬政策，并于1990年正式批准了国际劳工组织的《男女工人同工同酬公约》。
China was one of the first signatories to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women and has submitted timely reports on its implementation in China as required. China took part in formulating and examining the Nairobi Forward-Looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women to the Year 2000, and has laid down statutes and adopted concrete policies in accordance with China's reality so that the Nairobi Strategies may be realized. China has consistently carried out the principle that men and women enjoy equal pay for equal work. In 1990, it formally ratified the Convention Concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers for Work of Equal Value released by the International Labor Organization.
　　中国支持并参与“国际妇女年”和“联合国妇女十年”的活动。中国政府曾派代表团出席在墨西哥城、哥本哈根和内罗毕举行的三次世界妇女大会，并出席了五次国际筹备会和两次区域性筹备会议。在会上，中国代表充分肯定“联合国妇女十年”的活动，并就制定未来提高妇女地位的战略和一些重大的国际问题阐述了中国的立场和观点，为历次大会的成功作出了积极贡献。中国的妇女组织还派代表参加了与三次大会同时举行的非政府组织论坛的活动。中国先后十七次参加联合国系统举办的旨在实现妇女十年目标的培训班和研讨会，同与会各国交流了经验，增进了友谊。
China supported and engaged in activities for International Women's Year in 1975 and the UN Decade for Women, from 1975 to 1985. The Chinese government sent delegations to the world conferences on women held in Mexico City in 1975, Copenhagen in 1980 and Nairobi in 1985, and also to the five global preliminary meetings and two regional preparatory meetings. At these events, Chinese representatives gave full support to exertions for the United Nations Decade for Women and expounded China's stand and viewpoints on some major international problems and strategies for the advancement of conditions for women, thus making positive contributions to the success of these conferences. At the same time, Chinese women's organizations sent members to take part in Non-Governmental Organization Forum held during the three conferences. China attended 17 UN-sponsored training classes and seminars aimed at realizing the goals of the UN Decade for Women. In the course of these efforts, China exchanged observations and improved its relations with other countries.
　　中国妇女积极发展同世界各国妇女组织及妇女人士的交往。目前，中华全国妇女联合会已同130多个国家和地区的近480个政府和民间妇女、儿童组织机构，建立了友好联系。近年来，接待各国和地区的来宾已突破万人。来访的宾客有总统夫人、政府女部长、女议员、女企业家、女专家学者、妇女儿童组织负责人及其工作者。十五年来，中国共派280批妇女代表团出访。中国妇女的朋友遍天下。
Chinese women have made vigorous efforts to develop links with women organizations and individuals around the globe. To date, the All-China Women's Federation has established ties with nearly 480 governmental and non-governmental women's and children's organizations in over 130 countries and regions and received more than 10,000 visitors in recent years, including first ladies, women ministers, members of parliament, entrepreneurs, specialists, scholars and leaders and staff members of women's and children's groups. In the past 15 years, China has sent 280 women delegations abroad. Indeed, Chinese women have friends all over the world.
　　中国认为，虽然各个国家的历史和现状不同，经济发展水平相异，但是在妇女问题上都面临一些共同课题，存在某些相似的情况或困难。中国愿与世界各国妇女相互交流、相互借鉴、共同提高。近几年来，中国妇女界先后与美国、俄罗斯、日本等国的妇女组织举办妇女问题研讨会，就妇女普遍关心的问题进行探讨和交流。
China believes that although different countries have different histories and their realities and level of economic development vary, they face some common tasks, similar situation and difficulties with regard to women. China is ready to establish relations with women of all states to learn from each other so as to jointly improve the situation for women. In recent years, Chinese women's organizations have jointly sponsored seminars with their counterparts in the United States, Russia, Japan and other countries to study and exchange views on issues that confront women worldwide.
　　中国积极开展妇女方面的国际合作项目。应联合国教科文组织、亚太发展中心和联合国大学的要求，中国多次承担了关于中国妇女问题的研究项目，提交的报告被广泛散发，受到普遍好评。十多年来，全国妇联陆续与联合国儿童基金会、联合国妇女发展基金、联合国大学、加拿大国际发展署及一些国家的官方和民间援助机构合作，开展合作项目700余个，培训30多万人，执行合作项目范围遍及中国30个省、自治区和直辖市，内容涉及农村妇女扫盲和实用技术培训，城市待业女青年的培训，学前教育师资培训和普及妇幼卫生、家庭教育知识等。合作项目所取得的成果受到各方的称赞，其中“帮助青年就业项目”荣获联合国妇女发展基金特别奖。中华全国妇女联合会被誉为国际合作项目的理想伙伴。
China has taken an active part in international cooperative projects concerning women. At the request of UNESCO, the Asia-Pacific Development Center and United Nations University, China has undertaken research projects on Chinese women and submitted many reports which have all been well received. Over the past decade, the All-China Women's Federation has cooperated with the United Nations Children's Fund, United Nations Women's Development Fund, United Nations University, Canadian International Development Agency and other governmental and non-governmental organizations in over 700 projects in 30 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities. The schemes include such items as eliminating illiteracy among rural women and providing them with practical technical training, offering vocational training for job-seeking young urban women, training kindergarten teachers, and promoting women's and children's health care and family education. Over 300,000 women have taken part in these programs and the results have been outstanding. The Assistance for Youth Employment Project has been awarded a special prize by the United Nations Women's Development Fund, and the All-China Women's Federation has been highly commended as an ideal partner for international cooperation.
　　中国一贯支持发展中国家为促进妇女参与经济发展所作的努力。1980年以来，中国共向50个国家的妇女儿童组织提供了101批实物援助，主要有缝纫机、绣花机、文化体育用品、服装玩具等，为受援国培训待业女青年和开展妇女工作提供了一定的帮助。近年来，根据某些发展中国家经济发展的需要和要求，中国分别派草麻编、玉米皮编和刺绣技术小组赴莫桑比克、墨西哥、毛里求斯、乌干达和厄瓜多尔等国传授技术，帮助培训当地妇女，受到当地政府和人民的好评。
Support has flowed from China for efforts by developing countries to foster women's participation in economic development. Since 1980, China has provided 101 batches of material assistance to women's and children's organizations in 50 countries.The provisions included sewing and embroidery machines, cultural and sports facilities, and clothes and toys. They have helped vocational training for unemployed urban young women and promoted women's work. To meet the needs of these countries, China has in recent years dispatched technical groups specializing in straw, flax and corn straw weaving and embroidery to Mozambique, Mexico, Mauritius, Uganda and Ecuador to help raise the production skills of local women. These contributions have received high praise from the local governments and people.
　　中国在广泛参加国际妇女双边和多边活动中，始终坚持联合国提出的平等、发展与和平的主题。
China adheres to the United Nations theme of equality, development and peace when taking part in international bilateral and multilateral women's activities.
　　中国一贯主张男女平等。中国认为，男女权利的平等，不仅关系到妇女的切身利益，而且关系到人类智慧能否得到全面发挥，社会生产力能否得到充分解放。平等是保证妇女充分参与发展的重要条件。1985年3月，在审评联合国妇女十年成就世界会议第三届筹备会上，中国代表指出：“实现男女平等，这是妇女运动长期以来奋斗的目标，妇女十年在平等立法制定方面，有了显著进展，但仅有立法条文，还很不够……我们认为，战略中应着重强调在国际、区域、国家各级制定行动措施来实现事实上的平等，各国政府和非政府组织应为妇女提供法律咨询，帮助妇女真正有可能运用法律武器维护自己的合法权利。”现在世界上一些国家在政治、经济、社会、家庭以及种族方面仍然不同程度地存在着对妇女的歧视，因此，大幅度地缩短法律与事实上平等的差距仍是国际社会和各国政府进一步努力的重要目标。
In upholding the principle of equality between men and women, China believes this concept concerns not only the interests of women but also the full employment of the wisdom of humanity and total utilization of social productive forces. Equality is a prerequisite for women's participation in social development. In March 1985, at the third preliminary session on reviewing the achievements of the UN Decade for Women, the Chinese delegate pointed out, "Equality between men and women has been the goal of the women's movement for a long time. The United Nations Decade for Women has scored marked progress in legislative equality, but this is not enough.... We believe that strategically we must stress that efforts must be made at the international, regional and national levels to work out active plans in order to reach a genuine equality; every governmental and non-governmental organization should provide legal services for women and make it possible for them to adopt legal weapons to protect their legitimate rights." At present, political, economic, social, family and racial discrimination against women continue to exist in some countries to varying degrees. Hence, a significant narrowing of the gap between law and reality remains an important and arduous task for every government and the international community at large.
　　中国认为，实现男女平等，关键是让妇女平等地参与发展。
China is convinced that the key to achieving sexual equality is to enable women to take part in development as the equals of men. 
妇女是人类发展中的一支伟大力量，没有妇女的参与，发展是不可能取得成功的。
Women provide great momentum for human progress, and without their participation, true progress is not possible. 
目前，妇女充分参与发展的障碍还很多，除了要制定有关法律、法规，保障妇女与男子享有平等参与发展的权利之外，尤其要大力发展妇女教育，培养妇女人才，提高妇女的科学文化水平和管理能力。广大发展中国家由于历史的原因和不公正、不合理的国际经济秩序的束缚，大多经济发展水平低下，科学技术落后，严重妨碍了妇女参与社会经济的发展，导致妇女社会地位低下。为此，必须彻底改变旧的国际经济秩序，发展双边和多边的经济技术合作，使世界各国妇女，尤其是发展中国家妇女充分参与社会的发展，进而实现男女平等。
Nowadays, many obstacles still prevent women from fully taking part in social development. In addition to formulating laws and regulations to ensure the right to equal participation, it is necessary to strengthen women's education so that women's talents are developed and their scientific and cultural standards and management skills can be enhanced. For historical reasons and as a result of an unfair and irrational global economic order, most of the developing countries suffer from a low level of economic development and back-wardness in science and technology. This has seriously hindered women's participation in social and economic development, hence their low social status. For this reason, the international economic order should be thoroughly transformed. Bilateral and multilateral economic and technical cooperation should be developed so that women worldwide, and especially those from developing countries, can enjoy the right to participate in social development as men's equals.
　　中国认为，妇女是维护世界和平的伟大力量。和平关系到世界的前途，关系到各国人民特别是妇女的命运。
China believes that women are a great force in maintaining world peace, and this is closely linked to the future of our planet and the destiny of the mankind, women in particular. 
没有和平就谈不上发展，谈不上男女平等。
Without peace, development and sexual equality are out of the question. 
然而，当今世界上，以大欺小、以强凌弱、干涉内政、侵犯主权、武装侵略和占领他国领土等违背联合国宪章和国际法准则的行径仍然存在，局部战争和地区冲突从未停止。中国坚决支持各国人民和妇女反对外来侵略和干涉，为维护国家主权和民族独立、发展民族经济、促进妇女发展所作出的努力。中国主张，世界上所有国家，不分大小贫富强弱，应该一律平等，按照和平共处五项原则和睦相处，各国的事务应由各国人民自己解决，世界的事应由各国协商解决。多年来，中国妇女为维护世界和平，反对帝国主义、新老殖民主义、霸权主义、一切形式的种族主义、法西斯主义、各种形式的恐怖主义等，进行了不懈的努力。
However, in today's world, acts which go against the United Nations Charter and the principles of international law still exist. These include such practices as the big bullying the small, the strong domineering over the weak, interfering in the internal affairs of other countries and violating their sovereignty, and armed aggression and occupation of the territory of other states. Local wars and regional conflicts have been incessant. China firmly supports the struggle by women and the entire humanity against external aggression and interference and the efforts to safeguard national independence, promote national economies and women's advancement. China believes that all countries, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, are equal. Countries should abide by the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence. The internal affairs of a state should be solved by its own people, while international matters should be settled through consultation among countries. Over the years, Chinese women have made unremitting efforts to maintain world peace, and to fight against imperialism, old and new colonialism, hegemonism, racism of various forms, fascism and all forms of terrorism.
　　中国积极承办第四次世界妇女大会，努力当好东道主。自联合国接受中国政府的邀请，决定于1995年9月在北京举行第四次世界妇女大会以来，中国政府十分重视做好大会的筹备工作。1992年8月，国务院成立了由国家有关部委、北京市政府和群众团体等30个单位的负责人组成的第四次世界妇女大会中国组织委员会全面负责大会的筹备工作。以国务委员彭佩云为主席的组委会强调，要将迎接第四次世界妇女大会的过程作为进一步推动中国妇女全面参与发展、实现平等权益的过程。1993年3月，中国总理李鹏在全国人大八届一次会议上的政府工作报告中强调“要办好1995年在北京召开的第四次世界妇女大会”，这是中国政府向全国人民进行的动员，也是向国际社会做出的庄严保证。目前，中国政府正认真履行东道国应承担的义务，积极与联合国机构、各国政府和有关非政府组织加强联系、密切合作，为大会的顺利召开竭尽全力，为推动全世界妇女的进步作出贡献。
As the host country of the Fourth World Conference on Women, China will make positive efforts to ensure its success. Since the United Nations accepted the application of the Chinese government and decided to hold the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing in September 1995, the Chinese government has attached great importance to its preparatory work. In August 1992, the State Council set up an Organization Committee consisting of leaders from 30 relevant ministries, the Beijing municipal government and mass groups to be fully responsible for the preparation. Chaired by State Councilor Peng Peiyun, the committee stresses that the preparation for the conference should also be used as an opportunity to promote the role of Chinese women in social development and sexual equality. In March 1993, Chinese Premier Li Peng stressed in the Report on Government Work at the First Session of the Eighth National People's Congress, "We should make the Fourth World Conference on Women a success." This is a call to the Chinese people for general mobilization and also a solemn pledge to the international community. At present, the Chinese government is earnestly carrying out its responsibilities as a host country and increasing its contacts and cooperation with UN organizations, governments and relevant non-governmental organizations in the world. It is exerting its utmost efforts to facilitate the convocation of the conference and contribute to the global advancement of women.
中国知识产权保护状况
Intellectual Property Protection in China
中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China
一九九四年六月·北京
June 1994, Beijing

目录
Contents
前言
Foreword 
中国保护知识产权的基本立场和态度 
China's Basic Position Regarding the Protection of Intellectual Property Rights
中国具有高水平保护知识产权的法律制度
China Has a High-Grade Legal System for Intellectual Property Protection 
中国具有完备的保护知识产权的执法体系
China Has a Complete Law Enforcement System for Intellectual Property Protection
结束语
Concluding Remarks

前　言
Foreword 
　　中国是一个有着悠久文明历史的国家。
Chinese civilization has a long history. 
中华民族蕴藏着极大的创造性，她创造的灿烂文化对人类文明的进程产生过深刻的影响。
The Chinese nation has a vast reservoir of creativity. The brilliant culture created by the Chinese people has exerted a deepgoing influence on the progress of human civilization. 
数千年来中国众多杰出的科学家、发明家、文学家、艺术家、曾以其辉煌的智力劳动成果为人类文明发展做出过巨大的贡献。
Over the past several thousand years, vast numbers of outstanding Chinese scientists, inventors, writers and artists have given the glorious fruits of their mental labour to the development of humanity's common civilization, making enormous contributions.
　　伴随着人类文明与商品经济发展，知识产权保护制度诞生了，并日益成为各国保护智力成果所有者权益，促进科学技术和社会经济发展，进行国际竞争的有力的法律措施。由于历史上的各种原因，从整体上看，中国知识产权制度的建设起步较晚。但是，实行改革开放后，为了更快地发展社会生产力和推动社会全面进步，适应社会主义市场经济发展的需要，促进与世界经济的接轨，中国加快了知识产权保护制度建设的步伐。从七十年代末至今的短短十几年间，中国做了大量卓有成效的工作，走过了一些发达国家通常需要几十年甚至上百年时间才能完成的立法路程，建立起了比较完整的知识产权保护法律体系，在知识产权的立法和执法方面取得了举世瞩目的成就。
The intellectual property protection system emerged as a product of the development of human civilization and commodity economy and, in various countries, it has increasingly become an effective legal tool for protecting the interests of the owner of intellectual products, promoting the development of science, technology and the social economy, and allowing international competition. As a whole, China, however, for a variety of historical reasons, began work on its intellectual property rights protection system at a comparatively late date. After China started reform and opening to the outside world, it accelerated the process of establishing an intellectual property rights protection system in order to rapidly develop social productive forces, promote overall social progress, meet the needs of developing a socialist market economy and expedite China's entry into the world economy. Since the end of the 1970s, China has done a tremendous amount of effective work in this field, covering in a little more than a dozen years a distance which took other developed countries scores of years, even a hundred years, establishing a relatively comprehensive legal system for the protection of intellectual property rights, thereby attracting worldwide attention for its achievements not only in establishing the system but also in enforcement.
　　当前，知识产权保护成为国际间政治、经济、科学技术和文化交往中一个受到普遍关注的问题。围绕这个问题展开的国际间双边、多边的谈判，特别是关税与贸易总协定《与贸易有关的知识产权协议》的达成，促使世界范围内对知识产权的保护标准达到了一个新的水平。
Today, intellectual property protection is an issue of universal concern in the international political, economic, scientific, technological and cultural exchanges. International bilateral and multilateral negotiations on this topic, especially the reaching of the Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), have raised worldwide intellectual property protection to a new level.
　　在国际社会高度重视知识产权保护的今天，中国保护知识产权的立场是什么?中国知识产权立法和执法的现状如何?中国采取了哪些措施承担知识产权保护的国际义务?有必要做一基本的介绍。
In today's world, great importance is attached to intellectual property protection. What is China's specific position regarding this question? What is China's current legislation on intellectual property rights and how is it enforced? What measures has China taken to ensure its international commitment to intellectual property protection? A brief introduction to these issues will prove useful.
中国保护知识产权的基本立场和态度
China's Basic Position Regarding the Protection of Intellectual Property Rights
　　中国政府认为，知识产权保护制度对于促进科学技术进步、文化繁荣和经济发展具有重要意义和作用，它既是保证社会主义市场经济正常运行的重要制度，又是开展国际间科学技术、经济、文化交流与合作的基本环境和条件之一。中国把保护知识产权作为改革开放政策和社会主义法制建设的重要组成部分，从七十年代末即着手制定有关法律、法规，同时积极参加相关国际组织的活动，加强与世界各国在知识产权领域的交往与合作。因而，中国知识产权保护制度的建设，在初始阶段就显示了面向世界、面向国际保护水平的高起点。在改革开放的推动下，中国知识产权立法速度之快，也是史无前例的。
It is the Chinese government's view that the intellectual property protection system plays a significant role in promoting progress in science and technology, enriching culture and developing the economy. It functions both as an important institution ensuring the normal running of the socialist market economy and as one of the basic environments and conditions for conducting international exchange and cooperation in science, technology, economy and culture. China considers the protection of intellectual property an important part of its policy of reform and opening to the outside world and of the building of its socialist legal system. Beginning in the late 1970s, China has been formulating laws and regulations for intellectual property rights protection, and has been participating in activities organized by the relevant international organizations aimed at strengthening international exchange and cooperation in the field of intellectual property rights. From its inception China's intellectual property rights protection system was directed towards the world and geared to high international standards. Spurred on by its reform and opening up, China has carried on its intellectual property protection legislation at a speed never before known.
　　1980年3月3日，中国政府向世界知识产权组织递交了加入书。从1980年6月3日起，中国成为世界知识产权组织的成员国。
On March 3, 1980, the Chinese government submitted its application for admission to the World Intellectual Property Organization, and became a member state as of June 3, 1980.
　　1982年8月23日，第五届全国人民代表大会常务委员会第二十四次会议通过了《中华人民共和国商标法》，并于1983年3月1日起施行。这是中国开始系统建立现代知识产权法律制度的一个重要标志。
The Trademark Law of the People's Republic of China was adopted at the 24th meeting of the Standing Committee of the Fifth National People's Congress on August 23, 1982, effective March 1, 1983, significantly marking the beginning of the systematic establishment of China's modern legal system for the protection of intellectual property rights.
　　1984年3月12日，第六届全国人民代表大会常务委员会第四次会议通过《中华人民共和国专利法》，并于1985年4月1日起施行。
On March 12, 1984 the fourth meeting of the Standing Committee of the Sixth National People's Congress adopted the Patent Law of the People's Republic of China, effective April 1, 1985.
　　1984年12月19日，中国政府向世界知识产权组织递交了《保护工业产权巴黎公约》(简称巴黎公约)的加入书。从1985年3月19日起，中国成为巴黎公约成员国。
On December 19, 1984, the Chinese government submitted its instrument of accession to the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property to the World Intellectual Property Organization and became a member state as of March 19, 1985.
　　1986年4月12日，第六届全国人民代表大会第四次会议通过了《中华人民共和国民法通则》，该法于1987年1月1日起施行。知识产权作为一个整体首次在中国的民事基本法中被明确，并被确认为公民和法人的民事权利。该法也首次明确公民、法人等享有著作权(版权)。
The General Principles of the Civil Law of the People's Republic of China were adopted at the fourth session of the Sixth National People's Congress on April 12, 1986, effective January 1, 1987. In this legislation, intellectual property rights as a whole were clearly defined in China's basic civil law for the first time as the civil rights of citizens and legal persons. This law for the first time affirmed citizens' and legal persons' right of authorship (copyright).
　　中国政府积极促进建立集成电路国际保护的环境。1989年世界知识产权组织在华盛顿召开的外交会议上通过了《关于集成电路知识产权保护条约》，中国是该条约首批签字国之一。
The Chinese government has also worked hard in helping to build up an international environment wherein intellectual property rights in integrated circuits are protected. The World Intellectual Property Organization adopted the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuit at a diplomatic conference held in Washington D.C. in 1989; China was among the first signatory states.
　　1989年7月4日，中国政府向世界知识产权组织递交了《商标国际注册马德里协定》(简称马德里协定)的加入书。从1989年10月4日起，中国成为马德里协定成员国。
The Chinese government presented its instrument of accession to the Madrid Agreement for the International Registration of Trademarks to the World Intellectual Property Organization on July 4, 1989, and became a member state as of October 4, 1989.
　　1990年9月7日，第七届全国人民代表大会常务委员会第十五次会议通过了《中华人民共和国著作权法》，该法于1991年6月1日起施行。
The Copyright Law of the People's Republic of China was adopted by the 15th meeting of the Seventh National People's Congress Standing Committee on September 7, 1990, effective June 1, 1991.
　　1992年7月10日和7月30日，中国政府分别向世界知识产权组织和联合国教育、科学、文化组织递交了《保护文学和艺术作品伯尔尼公约》(简称伯尔尼公约)和《世界版权公约》的加入书。分别从1992年10月15日和10月30日起，中国成为伯尔尼公约和世界版权公约的成员国。
On July 10, 1992, the Chinese government presented its instrument of accession to the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works to the World Intellectual Property Organization and on July 30, 1992 its instrument of accession to the Universal Copyright Convention to UNESCO, becoming a member state of both conventions as of October 15 and October 30, 1992 respectively.
　　1993年1月4日，中国政府向世界知识产权组织递交了《保护录音制品制作者防止未经许可复制其录音制品公约》(简称录音制品公约)的加入书。从1993年4月30日起，中国成为录音制品公约的成员国。
On January 4, 1993, the Chinese government presented its instrument of accession to the Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms Against Unauthorized Duplication of Their Phonograms to the World Intellectual Property Organization, and became a member state as of April 30, 1993.
　　1993年9月2日，第八届全国人民代表大会常务委员会第三次会议通过了《中华人民共和国反不正当竞争法》，该法于1993年12月1日起施行。
The Law of the People's Republic of China on Combating Unfair Competition was adopted by the third meeting of the Standing Committee of the Eighth National People's Congress on September 2, 1993, and became effective on December 1 of the same year.
　　1993年9月15日，中国政府向世界知识产权组织递交了《专利合作条约》的加入书。从1994年1月1日起，中国成为专利合作条约成员国，中国专利局成为专利合作条约的受理局、国际检索单位和国际初步审查单位。
On September 15, 1993, the Chinese government submitted its instrument of accession to the Patent Cooperation Treaty to the World Intellectual Property Organization, becoming a member state as of January 1, 1994. The Patent Office of China is China's agency dealing with cases involving the Patent Cooperation Treaty, performing international patent searches and preliminary examinations.
　　上述历史事实仅是中国知识产权立法和参加相关国际组织活动的部分记录，已足以证明了中国高度重视知识产权保护的立场和态度。
The above are only part of the records of China's intellectual property legislation and its participation in the activities organized by related international organizations, demonstrating the importance China has attached to intellectual property protection.
　　中国知识产权法律制度的基本框架主要完成于八十年代。进入九十年代后，国际经济关系和环境发生了很大的变化。1990年11月，在关税与贸易总协定(乌拉圭回合)多边贸易谈判中，达成了《与贸易有关的知识产权协议》草案，它标志着保护知识产权的新的国际标准的形成。中国政府积极参与了这一谈判进程，并为推动该协定的达成做出了极大的努力。出于扩大开放的需要，中国积极履行保护知识产权的国际义务，努力使知识产权保护水平向新的国际标准靠拢，采取了许多重大措施，进一步提高中国现行的知识产权保护水平。
The basic framework for China's intellectual property rights protection legal system was completed for the most part in the 1980s. In the 1990s, international economic relations and the international economic environment have already undergone great changes. In November, 1990, multilateral trade negotiations in GATT's Uruguay Round produced a draft Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights. This signaled that a new international standard of intellectual property rights protection was taking form. The Chinese government actively participated in the negotiations and made unremitting efforts towards their final success. In order to meet the needs of the ever-wider opening up, China has consciously sought to fulfil its international obligations in intellectual property rights protection, endeavouring to bring its intellectual property protection level near the new international standards, and has taken many major measures to further raise its current level of intellectual property rights protection.
　　中国政府恪守保护知识产权有关国际公约及双边协定的真诚立场和充分承担国际义务的能力，得到了国际舆论广泛的赞誉和支持。世界知识产权组织总干事阿帕德·鲍格胥博士在回顾该组织与中国合作20年的历史时指出，“在知识产权史上，中国完成所有这一切的速度是独一无二的。
The Chinese government's sincerity in its efforts to scrupulously abide by international conventions and bilateral agreements regarding the protection of intellectual property rights, and its capacity to fully implement its international obligations have been appreciated and supported by world opinion. When reviewing the World Intellectual Property Organization's past 20 years of cooperation with China, Dr. Arpad Bogsch, Director-General of the Organization, pointed out that "China had accomplished all this at a speed unmatched in the history of intellectual property protection."
　　中国坚持“有法可依，有法必依，执法必严，违法必究”的法制原则。为了更好地贯彻这一原则，中国在健全、完善法律制度，严肃执法、坚决打击侵权违法行为的同时，针对知识产权制度在中国建立的时间较短，公民的知识产权意识比较薄弱等情况，大力开展知识产权保护的法制宣传教育，并加速知识产权领域专业人员的培训。在中国，每一部知识产权法律的颁布，都有广播电台、电视台和报刊等新闻传媒广为宣传，并大量出版单行本和有关录像教育片等。同时，各级政府有关部门通过举办法律知识讲座、培训班等，在广大公民中迅速普及知识产权法律知识。如，中国专利法修改后，全国有数百万人接受了培训，仅湖南省接受培训的人员就达60万。在中国各地，近年来运用法律武器解决知识产权纠纷的现象增多，从一个侧面说明了全社会知识产权法律意识的增强和知识产权知识的普及。为了加速培养知识产权方面的人才，中国政府还同有关国际组织密切合作，组织有关人员出国考察学习、参加各种培训班和研讨会。仅与世界知识产权组织合作举办的培训班和研讨会就达30多次，接受培训的人员达3000多人(次)。在中国的高等院校中，目前已有70多所院校开展了知识产权的教学研究。如，中国人民大学于1986年设立了知识产权教学研究中心，招收大学非法学专业的毕业生攻读知识产权第二学位；北京大学在开展有关教学研究的基础上，于1993年成立了知识产权学院。中国已逐步形成包括第二学位、硕士生、博士生的培养知识产权领域专业人才的教育体制，一批批知识产权专业化人才正在向社会不断地输送。
China adheres to the principle in legal system that "there shall be laws to abide by, everyone should abide by the law, the law must be enforced strictly, and those who violate the law must be dealt with." Still, the intellectual property rights protection system has only comparatively recently been introduced in China, and some portion of the population has a rather incomplete understanding of intellectual property rights. In order to better implement this principle, while improving its legal system, enforcing the laws earnestly and striking relentless blows at infringements and other unlawful practices, China has spared no efforts in publicizing and providing education about the intellectual property protection legal system and in accelerating the training of professional personnel in this field. In China the promulgation of every intellectual property law was followed by widespread publicity through the media and distribution of large quantities of educational video-tapes and seperate editions of the law. Mean-while, governments at all levels ran legal knowledge forums and training classes so as to promptly make the relevant law known to all the people. After the revision of the Patent Law, for instance, millions of people throughout China attended such classes, the attendance in Hunan Province alone reaching 600,000 people. The fact that there has been an increasing number of cases involving intellectual property rights in recent years and that these cases have been remedied through recourse to law reflects the people's heightened awareness and the wide spread of intellectual property rights knowledge throughout society. In order to speed up the training of personnel in this field, the Chinese government has, in close cooperation with related international organizations, sent people abroad to study or to attend training classes and seminars. Together with the World Intellectual Property Organization, China has held more than 30 training classes and seminars, with the attendance of over 3,000 people. Programmes in intellectual property rights education and research have also been initiated at over 70 institutions of higher learning throughout the country. In 1986, a teaching and research centre for intellectual property rights was established at the People's University of China, enrolling non-law majors to study for a second degree in intellectual property rights; Beijing University's School of Intellectual Property Rights was founded in 1993 on the basis of the achievements it had attained in teaching and research in this regard. An education system for training professional personnel in this field for their second, Master's or Doctor's degrees has gradually taken form in China, providing the nation with batch after batch of qualified personnel in intellectual property rights protection.
中国具有高水平保护知识产权的法律制度
China Has a High-Grade Legal System for Intellectual Property Protection
　　伴随着改革开放的步伐，中国在知识产权保护方面取得了长足的进展。中国根据国情和国际发展趋势制定和完善各项知识产权法律、法规，至今已形成了有中国特色的社会主义保护知识产权的法律体系。中国知识产权的保护范围和保护水平逐步同国际惯例接轨，已对知识产权实行高水平的法律保护。
Along with its progress in reform and opening up, China has made big strides in intellectual property protection. In accordance with its national conditions and current tendencies in international development, China has formulated and finetuned various laws and regulations on intellectual property protection, thereby constructing a socialist legal system for intellectual property protection with Chinese characteristics. The scope of the intellectual property rights protected in China and the degree of protection afforded have gradually conformed with international practices and the high degree of legal protection for intellectual property rights has been realized.
　　1983年3月开始实施的《中华人民共和国商标法》及其实施细则，在商标注册程序中的申请、审查、注册等诸多方面的原则，与国际上通行的原则是完全一致的。为适应改革开放和经济形势发展的需要，更有效地打击假冒商标、制止商标侵权行为，切实保护商标注册专用权，中国于1993年又分别对商标法及其实施细则进行了修改，扩大了商标的保护范围，除商品商标外，增加了服务商标的注册和管理的规定。在形式审查中增加了补正程序，在实质审查中建立审查意见书制度，方便了商标注册申请人，这同关税与贸易总协定达成的《与贸易有关的知识产权协议》要求全部吻合。国家工商行政管理局还发布《商标印制管理规定》、《商标使用许可合同备案管理办法》等一系列规章。1993年2月，全国人民代表大会常务委员会作出了《关于惩治假冒注册商标犯罪的补充规定》，进一步强化了惩治假冒注册商标犯罪和处罚商标侵权行为的力度。这些法律、法规和规章为充分、有效地保护中外注册商标专用权提供了保障。
Effective as of March 1983, the Trademark Law of the People's Republic of China and the rules for its implementation set forth the principles of application, examination and registration in trademark registration procedures which are entirely identical with common international principles. In order to meet the requirements of the reform and opening up and of economic development, to more effectively crack down on trademark counterfeiting and stop acts of infringement, and to conscientiously protect the right to exclusive use of a registered trademark, in 1993 China revised both its Trademark Law and the rules for its implementation to expand the range of trademarks protected. Regulations on commodity trademarks were joined by regulations on the registration and management of service trademarks; in examination as to form, a revision procedure was added, and in examination as to substance, a written comment system was established to provide convenience for registered trademark applicants. All these regulations coincide completely with the requirements of GATT's Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights. In addition, the State Administration for Industry and Commerce has issued a series of regulations including the Regulations on the Administration of the Printing of Trademarks and the Procedures for Filing License Contracts for the Use of Trademarks. In February 1993, the National People's Congress Standing Committee adopted the Supplementary Regulations on Punishing Criminal Counterfeiting of Registered Trademarks to further intensify punishment for such counterfeiting and other infringements. These laws and regulations fully and effectively guarantee the right to the exclusive use of Chinese and foreign registered trademarks.
　　1985年4月开始实施的《中华人民共和国专利法》及其实施细则，使中国的知识产权保护范围扩大到对发明创造专利权的保护。为了使中国的专利保护水平进一步向国际标准靠拢，全国人民代表大会常务委员会于1992年9月4日通过了专利法修正案，对专利法作出了重要修改。新修改的专利法，从扩大对外开放和有利于科学技术、经济发展的需要出发，一是扩大了专利的保护范围，专利授予所有技术领域的发明，不论它是产品还是方法，即对药品和化学物质产品，对食品、饮料和调味品均无例外地授予专利；二是将发明专利的保护期限从自申请日起15年延长为自申请日起20年，将实用新型专利和外观设计专利的保护期限从自申请日起5年延长为自申请日起10年；三是进一步强化了对专利权的保护，除对专利方法的保护延及到该专利方法直接得到的产品外，还明确规定进口专利产品必须得到专利权人同意，使得对专利权人权益的保护更加充分；四是重新规定了对专利实施强制许可的条件。这使中国对专利权的保护达到了一个新的水平。这样，中国的专利法同关税与贸易总协定达成的《与贸易有关的知识产权协议》基本接轨。
The Patent Law of the People's Republic of China and the rules for its implementation came into effect in April 1985, expanding the scope of intellectual property protection in China to include inventions and other new creations. In order to bring the level of China's patent protection closer to international standards, the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress adopted an amendment to the Patent Law on September 4, 1992, which included important revisions. Proceeding from the needs of expanding the opening up and accelerating scientific, technological and economic development, first, the revised Patent Law expands the scope of patent protection: patents may be granted to all types of technological inventions, whether new products or new techniques, including pharmaceutical products and substances obtained by means of a chemical process, foods, beverages and flavourings. Second, an invention patent's duration has been extended from 15 years from the date of application to 20 years; the duration of utility model patents and of exterior design patents has been extended from 5 years from the date of application to 10 years. Third, the protection of patent rights has been further strengthened. In addition to extending the protection of a patented process to include products directly produced by that process, the law clearly stipulates that the importation of patented products requires the permission of the patent holder, thereby giving more effective protection to the rights and interests of patentees. Fourth, conditions for imposing compulsory patent license were re-stipulated. These measures mark the reaching of a new level of patent protection in China. In this way, the Patent Law of China has essentially been brought in line with the GATT Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.
　　《中华人民共和国著作权法》及其实施条例，明确了保护文学、艺术和科学作品作者的著作权以及与其相关的权益。依据该法，中国不仅对文字作品，口述作品，音乐、戏剧、曲艺、舞蹈作品，美术、摄影作品，电影、电视、录像作品，工程设计、产品设计图纸及其说明，地图、示意图等图形作品给予保护，而且把计算机软件纳入著作权保护范围。中国是世界上为数不多的明确将计算机软件作为著作权法保护客体的国家之一。国务院还颁布了《计算机软件保护条例》，规定了保护计算机软件的具体实施办法，作为著作权法的配套法规，于1991年10月施行。国务院于1992年9月25日颁布了《实施国际著作权条约的规定》，对保护外国作品著作权人依国际条约享有的权利作了具体规定。
The Copyright Law of the People's Republic of China and the rules for its implementation explicitly protect the copyright and other legitimate rights and interests of the authors of literary, artistic and scientific works. The law provides that in addition to protecting the copyright of written works, oral works, music, operas, quyi (folk art forms including ballad singing, story telling, comic dialogues, clapper talks, cross talks, etc), choreography, works of fine arts, photographs, films, TV programmes, video tapes, engineering designs, product designs and their descriptions, maps, sketch maps and other graphic works, China also protects computer software. China is among a select group of countries that have explicitly listed computer software as the object of protection by copyright laws. The State Council has, moreover, promulgated the Regulations on the Protection of Computer Software, providing the specifics whereby the laws protecting computer software will be implemented. These regulations, a necessary adjunct to the Copyright Law, came into effect in October 1991. On September 25, 1992 the State Council promulgated the Regulations on the Implementation of the International Copyright Treaty, providing specific regulations on protecting foreign authors' copyrights in accordance with the international treaty.
　　此外，全国人民代表大会常务委员会制定的《中华人民共和国技术合同法》和《中华人民共和国科学技术进步法》等，以及国务院制定的一系列保护知识产权的行政法规，使中国的知识产权法律制度进一步完善，在总体上与国际保护水平更为接近和协调。
These laws and regulations have been joined by the Technological Contract Law of the People's Republic of China and the Law on Scientific and Technological Progress of the People's Republic of China as formulated by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, as well as a series of administrative regulations concerning intellectual property protection worked out by the State Council, together further optimizing the nation's legal system for the protection of intellectual property rights, in the whole bringing the system close to and in coordination with international levels of protection.
　　中国具有完备的知识产权保护法律措施。中国的知识产权法律规定了违反法律规定的行为应承担的法律责任，包括民事责任、行政处罚和刑事责任。
China has a complete legal system for the protection of intellectual property rights. China's intellectual property law stipulates the legal responsibilities to be borne by anyone who violates the law, including civil liability, criminal liability and exposure to administrative sanctions.
　　中国的专利法规定，对专利侵权行为，专利权人或者利害关系人可以请求专利管理机关进行处理，也可以直接向人民法院起诉。专利管理机关处理的时候，有权责令侵权人停止侵权行为，赔偿损失。对于将非专利产品或非专利方法冒充专利产品或专利方法的，由专利管理机关责令停止冒充行为，公开更正，并处以罚款。对于假冒他人专利情节严重的，对直接责任人员，比照刑法的有关规定追究刑事责任，即可以对直接责任人员，处3年以下有期徒刑、拘役或者罚金。
China's Patent Law provides that in the case of infringement arising from the exploitation of a patent without authorization of the patentee, the patentee or other affected parties may request the patent administrative authorities to deal with the matter or may directly file suit in a people's court. In investigating and dealing with the matter, the patent administrative authorities are empowered to order the infringer to stop all acts of infringement and compensate for any losses. Whoever counterfeits a patented product or wrongly appropriates a patented technique will be ordered by the patent administrative authorities to cease all acts of counterfeiting, to provide the public with notification of his or her violation, and to pay a fine. In the case of serious violations, the criminal liability of the person directly responsible shall be investigated through application of relevant articles of the Criminal Law, and if found guilty, the person directly responsible shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years, criminal detention or a fine.
　　中国的商标法律法规规定，对于侵犯商标专用权的，工商行政管理部门可以依其职权或者消费者举报，进行主动检查和处理；被侵权人可以向侵权人所在地或者侵权行为为地县级以上工商行政管理部门要求处理，有关工商行政管理部门有权责令侵权人立即停止侵权行为，赔偿被侵权人的损失；对于侵犯商标专用权，未构成犯罪的，工商行政管理部门可以处以罚款。当事人对于工商行政管理部门行政处理不服，可以在规定时限内向人民法院起诉，由法院进行判决。这些规定，方便了当事人，也保证了行政执法和司法审判的一致性、公正性和严肃性。对侵犯注册商标专用权的，被侵权人也可以直接向人民法院起诉。对于假冒他人的注册商标，构成犯罪的，除赔偿被侵权人的损失外，依法追究刑事责任。根据《关于惩治假冒注册商标犯罪的补充规定》，对于假冒注册商标违法所得数额较大或者有其他严重情节的，处3年以下有期徒刑或者拘役，可以并处或者单独处以罚金；对于违法所得数额巨大的，处3年以上7年以下有期徒刑，并处罚金。对于企业事业单位犯假冒注册商标罪的，对单位判处罚金，并对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接责任人员依法追究刑事责任。对于国家工作人员故意包庇假冒注册商标犯罪或者执法人员徇私枉法，规定追究其渎职罪。
China's trademark laws and regulations stipulate that in the event of infringement on the right to exclusive use of a registered trademark, the administrative department for industry and commerce can, in line with its functions and powers or on the basis of a consumer complaint, examine and deal with the violation on its own initiative. The party whose right has been infringed may also, at the place where the infringer lives or where the act of infringement took place, request an administrative department for industry and commerce at or above the county level to handle the matter. The relevant administrative department for industry and commerce has the right to order the infringer to immediately cease infringement and to compensate the party whose right has been infringed for its losses. If the act of infringement on the right to exclusive use of a registered trademark does not constitute a crime, the administrative department for industry and commerce may still impose a fine on the infringer. If the party concerned wishes to challenge the decision of the administrative department for industry and commerce, it may bring suit in a people's court within a fixed time and the court will render judgement on the case. These regulations provide convenience to the litigants, and, moreover, ensure consistency, impartiality and seriousness in administrative law enforcement and judicial adjudication. In the event of an infringement on the right to exclusive use of a registered trademark, the party whose right has been infringed may also directly bring suit in a people's court. If the counterfeiting of registered trademarks constitutes a crime, the person who committed the act shall be ordered to compensate the party whose right has been infringed for losses suffered and his criminal responsibility shall be investigated and dealt with in accordance with the law. In accordance with the Supplementary Regulations on Punishing Criminal Counterfeiting of Registered Trademarks, in cases where the illegal gains are relatively large or other serious circumstances are involved the counterfeiter of a registered trademark will be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention, and/or fined; if the illegal gains are very large the counterfeiter shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years and not more than seven years and be fined. If an enterprise or institution is guilty of criminally counterfeiting a registered trademark, the unit will be fined and the criminal liability of the person in charge and other people directly responsible for the counterfeiting shall be investigated and dealt with in accordance with the law. If a government employee knowingly covers up the criminal counterfeiting of a registered trademark or if a person charged with enforcing the law compromises the law for personal gain, his or her criminal malfeasance will be determined by law.
　　中国的著作权法规定，对于未经著作权人许可发表其作品的；未经合作作者许可，将与他人合作创作的作品当自己单独创作的作品发表的；没有参加创作，为谋取个人名利，在他人作品上署名的；歪曲、篡改他人作品的；未经著作权人许可，以各种方式使用其作品的；使用他人作品，未按规定支付报酬的；以及未经表演者许可，从现场直播其表演等侵权行为，应当根据情况，承担停止侵害、消除影响、公开赔礼道歉、赔偿损失等民事责任。对剽窃、抄袭他人作品的；未经著作权人许可，以营利为目的；未经录音、录像制作者许可，复制发行其制作的录音录像等侵权行为，根据情况，应承担民事责任，并可以由著作权行政管理部门给予没收非法所得、罚款等行政处分，对于侵犯著作权以及与著作权有关的权益的行为，当事人也可以直接向人民法院起诉。对于那些严重危害社会秩序，侵害著作权人及其他权利人合法权益的违法行为，情节严重构成犯罪的，可以根据有关法律，对侵权犯罪的行为人追究刑事责任。
The Copyright Law of China provides that the following acts shall be regarded as infringement: publication of a copyright owner's work without his or her permission, and the unauthorized publication of a cooperative work as the work of a single author; claiming authorship of another person's work without taking part in its creation with the intention of gaining fame or profit; distortion or alteration of another person's works; exploitation of an author's work in any manner without prior permission; the use of another's work without providing the legally stipulated payment; and live broadcast of a performance without the performer's prior permission. In such cases, the infringer shall bear civil responsibility for the cessation of the infringement, for the elimination of any negative effects caused by his actions, for offering a public apology, and for compensation for any losses. Those who plagiarize other people's works, or reproduce and distribute another person's works for their personal benefit without the copyright holder's permission, those who publish a book without the permission of the owner of the publishing right, and those who duplicate and distribute video and audio tapes without getting the permission of the tape manufacturers bear civil responsibility for their actions. The copyright administrative authorities may confiscate their illegal income or impose a fine on them. In the case of a copyright infringement or of violation of other related interests, the party whose rights have been infringed may also directly bring suit in a people's court. With regard to illegal activities that gravely jeopardize the social order or seriously infringe on the legitimate rights and interests of a copyright holder or the holder of other intellectual property rights, in cases where such violations constitute a crime the criminal liability of the infringer shall be investigated and dealt with in accordance with the relevant laws.
　　随着中国保护知识产权法律的实施，知识产权在中国得到有效的保护，对于鼓励发明创造和创作及公平竞争等起到了积极的作用。如，对商标注册专用权的保护，促使中外厂商在中国注册的商标数量迅速增加。截止1993年底，在中国的有效注册商标达41万余件。其中，国内注册商标35万余件，来自67个国家和地区的注册商标近6万件。以美国为例，1979年前，在中国注册的商标仅122件，到1993年达到16221件，增加了100多倍。1993年中国商标年申请量达17万件，其中新商标注册申请达13万余件，已跃居世界前列。又如，中国的专利法极大地鼓励了本国的发明创造，同时也有力地鼓励了外来的专利申请。1985年4月1日，专利法实施的首日就受理专利申请3455件。到1993年底，中国专利局累计受理专利申请36万多件。其中，发明、实用新型、外观设计分别占27.5%、62.8%和9.7%；国内申请占86.4%，外来申请占13.6%，分别来自于70个国家和地区。截止1993年底，已累计批准17.5万件专利。其中，发明专利2万多件，实用新型专利13万多件，外观设计专利2万多件。
With the implementation of intellectual property laws, intellectual property rights are effectively protected in China. These laws are also actively encouraging invention and other forms of creation and fair competition. For instance, the protection of the right to the exclusive use of registered trademarks has resulted in the rapid growth of the number of trademarks registered by Chinese and foreign businessmen in China. By the end of 1993, the number of effective registered trademarks had exceeded 410,000. Of these, 350,000 were domestic, with the remaining 60,000 coming from 67 countries and regions. Companies from the United States, for example, had only 122 trademarks registered in China before 1979; by 1993 that number had soared to 16,221, more than a hundred times the earlier figure. In 1993, there were 170,000 applications for trademark registration annually in China, including more than 130,000 applications for new trademarks registration, among the highest number in the world. In addition, the Patent Law of China has greatly encouraged inventions and other creations in China, and has proved a magnet to patent applications from other countries and regions. On April 1, 1985, the first day the Patent Law came into effect, 3,455 applications for patent rights were submitted. By the end of 1993, the Patent Office of China had handled over 360,000 applications for patent rights. Of those, 27.5 percent were for inventions, 62.8 percent for utility models, and 9.7 percent for exterior designs; domestic applications accounted for 86.4 percent, while 13.6 percent were applications from 70 countries and regions. By the end of 1993, 175,000 patents had been approved, including more than 20,000 invention patents, more than 130,000 utility model patents and over 20,000 exterior design patents.
中国具有完备的保护知识产权的执法体系
China Has a Complete Law Enforcement System for Intellectual Property Protection
　　中国不仅制定了一整套知识产权法律法规，在执法方面也是严肃公正的，并取得了显著的成效。
China has formulated comprehensive intellectual property rights laws and regulations. Today, it is earnest and fair in executing these laws, and much has been accomplished in this regard.
　　中国在执行知识产权法律法规方面所取得的成效，首先归因于知识产权法律中规定了完备的知识产权保护的司法途径与知识产权保护的行政途径。
These great achievements in the execution of the intellectual property rights protection laws and regulations are above all the product of comprehensive judicature and administration provided for in these same laws and regulations.
中国知识产权保护的司法途径 
China's judicial institutions for intellectual property protection.
    在中国，享有知识产权的任何公民、法人和其他组织，在其权利受到侵害时，均可依法向人民法院提起诉讼，享受切实有效的司法保护。
In China, any citizen, legal person or organization entitled to intellectual property rights whose rights and interests have been infringed may bring a lawsuit to the people's court in accordance with the law and receive practical and effective judicial protection.
　　人民法院依法独立行使审判权，只服从法律，不受任何其他行政机关、社会团体和个人的干涉。
The people's courts exercise judicial power independently according to law, are subordinate only to the law itself, and are not subject to interference by any administrative organ, public organization or individual.
　　严肃执法是司法工作的核心。人民法院进行审判活动坚持以事实为根据、以法律为准绳，严格按照实体法和程序法办案，实行合议、回避、公开审判、两审终审和审判监督等制度，依法受各级人民代表大会、人民检察院和人民群众的监督，保证审判活动的公开性、公正性和严肃性。
Earnest execution of the law is the core of the administration of justice. The judicial activities of a people's court are carried out on the basis of facts, and with the law providing the criterion. Cases are tried strictly in accordance with substantive and procedural laws. Cases are heard in an open court, and a collegial system, a challenge system, a system whereby the court of second instance is the court of last instance, and a trial supervision system are practised. Judicial work, in accordance with the law, is also subject to supervision by people's congresses and people's procuratorates at all levels and by the masses, so as to ensure openness, impartiality, and seriousness.
　　建立健全知识产权案件审判组织，完善审判制度，是人民法院正确审理知识产权案件，切实依法保护知识产权的重要保障。鉴于审理知识产权案件专业性强、技术含量高的特点，一些省份和直辖市如北京市、上海市、广东省、福建省、海南省等高级人民法院根据实际需要，自1992年以来，设立了知识产权审判庭，各经济特区以及北京市、上海市中级人民法院也设立了知识产权审判庭。其他省、自治区、直辖市人民政府所在地的中级人民法院在有关的审判庭里设立了专门审理知识产权案件的合议庭。这样集中审理知识产权案，有利于保证执法的统一性，有利于积累经验，提高知识产权案件的司法水平。
The establishment and fortification of the judicial organs for trying intellectual property rights cases and the optimization of the judicial system are important guarantees for the people's courts correctly to handle such cases and conscientiously to protect intellectual property rights according to law. In recognition of the specialized nature of intellectual property rights cases and the advanced nature of the technology often involved, the higher people's courts in several provinces and municipalities directly under the central government such as Beijing, Shanghai, Guangdong, Fujian and Hainan have since 1992 established such intellectual property rights courts as their actual needs demand. The intermediate people's courts in all the special economic zones as well as Beijing and Shanghai have also established intellectual property rights courts.Intermediate people's courts in the capital cities of other provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions have set up collegial panels specializing in cases involving intellectual property rights protection. In this manner the hearing of intellectual property rights cases is centralized with the advantageous results that unity in executing the law is ensured, experience in dealing with the law is amassed, and the quality of judicature in intellectual property rights cases is strengthened. 
　　随着中国知识产权法律的实施和司法保护力量的不断加强，各级人民法院受理和及时审结了一大批知识产权民事纠纷案件。据统计，1986年至1993年底，全国人民法院共受理知识产权民事纠纷案3505件，其中著作权案1168件；专利权案1783件；商标权案554件。人民法院通过对知识产权纠纷案件的审理，依法保护了中外知识产权所有人的合法权益。例如，“钻孔压降成桩法”发明专利的发明人诉北京市地铁地基工程公司发明专利权属纠纷。北京市高级人民法院审理认为，该项发明不属于专利法规定的职务发明，判决“钻孔压降成桩法”发明专利权归发明人所有。又如，香港山顿国际有限公司诉深圳华达电子有限公司侵犯商标专用权纠纷案。深圳市中级人民法院审理认为，原告在中国大陆申请注册的“SENDON”商标受法律保护；被告未经商标注册人许可，在同一种商品上使用“SENDON”商标构成侵犯注册商标专用权。判决被告赔偿原告468314.4元。
With the implementation of China's law on intellectual property protection and the increasing improvement of the judiciary's protective power, people's courts at various levels in China have accepted and decided a large number of civil disputes concerning intellectual property rights. A total of 3,505 cases concerning intellectual property rights disputes were accepted and handled by people's courts throughout the country from 1986 to the end of 1993, 1,168 of which concerned copyrights, 1,783 patents, and 554 trademark rights. The people's courts in accordance with the law defend the legitimate rights and interests of the foreign and domestic intellectual property rights holders through trying cases concerning intellectual property rights disputes. For example, the inventor of a new "technique for sinking piling using drill holes," brought a suit against the Beijing Subway Foundation Engineering Company to determine ownership of the patent on the invention. After trying the case, the Beijing Higher People's Court held that this invention was not a service invention as described by the Patent Law, so the patent right belonged to the inventor and not to his employer. In another example, Hong Kong's Sendon International Co., Ltd. brought suit against Shenzhen's Huada Electronics Co., Ltd. for trademark infringement. After hearing the case, the Shenzhen Intermediate People's Court ruled that the trademark "SENDON" was registered in China mainland by the plaintiff and should be protected by law. The defendant's use of the trademark "SENDON" on the same commodity sold by the plaintiff under that name constituted infringement on the rights to exclusive use of a registered trademark. The court decided that the defendant should pay the plaintiff 468,314.4 yuan in compensation.
　　知识产权是一项重要的民事权利，对于民事侵权行为，人民法院除可以依法责令侵权人承担停止侵害，消除影响，赔礼道歉，赔偿损失等民事责任外，还可依法对行为人给予必要的没收非法所得、罚款、拘留等制裁。
Intellectual property rights are important civil rights. In civil infringement cases, the people's court is empowered to order the infringer to bear civil responsibility for the cessation of the infringement, for the elimination of any negative effects caused by his actions, for offering apologies, and for compensation for any losses in accordance with the law. Furthermore, it is empowered to confiscate the infringer's illegal gains and/ or adjudge the infringer to criminal detention or a fine.
　　对那些侵犯他人知识产权情节严重，扰乱经济秩序，构成犯罪的，还可以依法追究其刑事责任。对于检察机关依法提起公诉的知识产权刑事犯罪案件，只要有充分证据，证明被告人假冒他人商标或专利，情节严重，构成犯罪的，人民法院严格依照法律规定，及时准确地予以惩处。据统计，1992年至1993年，人民法院受理假冒商标刑事案743件，审结731件，判处有期徒刑或拘役等刑事处分的共566人。广东省中山市人民法院对假冒美国美孚石油公司“MOBIL”商标的5名责任人除依法处以罚金外，还分别判处被告1至2年半的有期徒刑。这充分表明中国人民法院依法惩治犯罪，保护知识产权的坚定立场。
If the infringement of intellectual property rights is so serious that it has disrupted the economic order and constitutes a crime, the infringer's criminal responsibility is investigated and dealt with according to law. When a people's procuratorate institutes prosecution for a criminal act of infringement, if the evidence is sufficient to prove that the defendant has counterfeited another's trademark or patent right and the case is so serious as to constitute a crime, the people's court shall promptly and precisely impose punishment in strict accordance with the law. Between 1992 and 1993, people's courts accepted 743 criminal cases for counterfeiting trademarks, of which 731 have been tried with 566 people being sentenced to fixed terms of imprisonment, criminal detention or other punishments. The People's Court of Zhongshan City in Guangdong Province in separate cases imposed fines on five persons directly responsible for counterfeiting the American Mobil Oil Corporation's trademark "MOBIL," further sentencing the defendants to fixed terms of imprisonment from one year to two and a half years. This amply demonstrates that the people's courts of China are resolute in their stand towards punishing criminals and safeguarding intellectual property rights.
　　依据中国行政诉讼法，人民法院对公民、法人和其他组织因不服知识产权行政管理机关处理的知识产权纠纷决定提起的行政诉讼，有责任进行审理，并依法作出维持、撤销或变更行政决定的判决。
According to China's Administrative Procedure Law, if a citizen, legal person or organization wishes to contest a judgement or order of an administrative department for intellectual property protection in a dispute concerning intellectual property rights and to initiate administrative procedure litigation, the people's court shall try the case and shall, in accordance with the law, make a decision to maintain, rescind, or alter it.
　　人民法院审理涉外知识产权纠纷依据中国法律和中国加入或缔结的有关国际公约，坚持在适用法律上的国民待遇原则和对等原则，为促进国际经济技术和文化的交流与合作，提供了坚实的法律保证。深圳市中级人民法院审结的美国好富顿公司诉深圳市海联化工有限公司侵犯商标权纠纷案，在查明被告的侵权事实，确认其应承担侵权责任的基础上，经调解，双方当事人达成调解协议，被告立即停止侵权行为，公开向原告赔礼道歉，赔偿其经济损失13万元。同时，法院还对被告的违法行为作出罚款的民事制裁决定，该案从受理到结案仅用10天时间，受到了美方当事人的好评。美国好富顿公司将写有“中国法律公正，法官办案快速”的锦旗送到法院。
When a people's court tries a case arising from intellectual property rights involving foreign nationals, it acts in accordance with Chinese laws and relevant international conventions to which China is a party, adhering to the principle of equity and reciprocity. In this way, the court provides the solid legal guarantees necessary for expanding international economic, technological and cultural exchange and cooperation. The Shenzhen Intermediate People's Court accepted the American E.F. Houghton Company's suit against the Shenzhen Hailian Chemical Co., Ltd. for the latter's trademark violations. Investigation proved the defendant's infringement and held it responsible. The two parties negotiated a settlement through mediation. The defendant promptly stopped its acts of infringement, offered public apology to the plaintiff, and handed over 130,000 yuan as a compensation for the plaintiff's economic loss. The court, in addition, adjudged the defendant a civil sanction fine. Ten days passed from the court's acceptance of the case to its resolution, expeditious remedy much appreciated by the American plaintiff. In acknowledgement of this, the E. F. Houghton Company presented the court with a silk banner reading: "Chinese law is just; judges try cases expeditiously."
　　近几年来，人民法院为提高司法水平，采取了许多有力措施，使办案质量和效率都得到较快提高。为了扩大办案的影响，人民法院注意选择典型案件通过新闻媒介予以宣传报道，以案讲法，取得了明显的社会效果，维护了社会主义法制的尊严。
Over the past few years, in an effort to raise the level of the administration of justice, the people's courts have adopted a series of potent measures to improve their quality and efficiency in handling cases. In order to amplify their impact, the people's courts have selected typical cases and tried them publicly, conducting information campaigns through the various public media. Undeniable social effects have been achieved through the use of specific cases in the popularization of legal education and the dignity of the socialist legal system has been maintained.
中国知识产权保护的行政途径
Administrative channels for intellectual property protection in China.
    中国的知识产权保护制度，除按国际惯例采取司法途径外，从中国现实的国情出发，中国的专利法、商标法、著作权法等知识产权法律中都规定了知识产权保护的行政途径。
In addition to judicature in accordance with international practices, China's system for the protection of intellectual property rights comprises the Patent Law, the Trademark Law, and the Copyright Law and other administrative channels designated in intellectual property laws, all proceeding from China's actual conditions.
　　根据专利法的规定，国务院有关主管部门或地方人民政府可以设立专利管理机关。目前，中国地方设立的专利管理机关有50多个，国务院各部门设立的专利管理机关有20多个。根据著作权法的规定，设立了国家版权局和地方著作权行政管理机关。商标管理实行中央统一注册，地方分级管理的原则，从中央到省、市、地、县级的工商行政管理局，都内设商标管理机构，县以下还设有工商行政管理所。全国商标管理专职人员7000多，兼职人员达30万。
Under the Patent Law, the competent authorities in the State Council and local people's governments have the right to establish patent offices. Today, China has more than 50 patent offices established by local governments and more than 20 patent offices established by various ministries and departments under the State Council. The State Copyright Administration and local copyright administrative organs have been established in accordance with the Copyright Law. Trademark administration calls for unified registration of trademarks by the central government and level-by-level administration by the various local governments. Trademark administrative departments under the administrative bureaus for industry and commerce have been established at the central, provincial, city, prefectural and county levels; below the county level, there are administrative offices for industry and commerce. Today, there are well over 7,000 full-time trademark administration personnel throughout China, in addition to 300,000 part-time personnel.
　　中国知识产权行政管理机关依据法律规定的职权，维护知识产权法律秩序，鼓励公平竞争，调解纠纷，查处知识产权的侵权案件，保障广大人民群众的利益和良好的社会经济环境。
Chinese intellectual property rights administrative departments exercise their legally stipulated powers and functions to safeguard law and order within the field of intellectual property, encourage fair competition, mediate disputes, settle cases involving violations of intellectual property rights, and protect the interests of the broad masses of the people by maintaining a good social and economic environment.
　　中国知识产权行政执法程序简便，立案迅速，查处速度快，办案效率高。这对于权利所有人来说是极为有利的。中国专利管理机关对提出的专利侵权申诉均认真对待，及时依法处理。
In China the administrative procedures for solving disputes concerning intellectual property rights are simple and convenient. Cases can be quickly filed for official examination and possible prosecution, investigation follows promptly, and efficiency in handling the case is high. This is advantageous to the owners of the rights. The patent administrative organs in China always treat patent violation claims seriously and deal with them without delay in accordance with the law.
　　著作权法1991年6月施行后，到1993年底，中国各地方的著作权行政管理机关已查处了非法复制音像制品、非法复制图书等方面的侵权行为150多起，收缴销毁了侵权复制品，并对侵权者作出了行政处罚。1994年，中国政府组织有关部门对激光唱盘复录生产中的非法复制和图书出版中的非法复印进行了严厉打击。4月，广东省版权、文化、广播影视、工商行政管理、公安等部门联合组织了大规模的突击清查非法激光唱盘等音像制品行动。其后，上海、江苏、湖南等地也相继采取了类似的清查行动。这些行动，狠狠地打击了生产销售盗版制品活动。同时，中国政府有关部门采取措施，对激光唱盘生产加工企业的设立加强管理，对其生产加工活动依法进行监督。
Since the Copyright Law was put into force, local administrative organs responsible for copyright affairs investigated and dealt with more than 150 cases involving pirated books and video products from June 1991 to the end of 1993. They have confiscated and destroyed the pirated goods and levied administrative sanctions on the infringers. In 1994, the Chinese government has organized the departments concerned to launch an assault, investigating and dealing with the illegal duplication of laser discs and illegal reproduction of books. In April 1994 in Guangdong Province, the administrative departments in charge of copyrights, cultural affairs, broadcast, film and video-tapes, the administrative departments for industry and commerce, and public security departments took joint action to deal with the illegal duplication of laser discs. Subsequently, Shanghai, Jiangsu and Hunan also took actions to deal with these problems. These measures dealt a heavy blow to the production and selling of pirated products. Over this same period, relevant departments of the Chinese government took steps to strengthen administration over the establishment of enterprises manufacturing compact discs and supervision over their production in accordance with the law.
　　中国商标法实施10余年来，工商行政管理机关共查处了商标侵权假冒案13万件。其中，包括一大批大案，如“中华”卷烟，“永久”、“凤凰”、“飞鸽”自行车，“贵州茅台”酒，“新开河”人参等商标侵权假冒案件，有效地保护了商标注册人的合法权益。
The Trademark Law of China has been in effect for more than ten years. During this time, the administrative departments for industry and commerce have dealt with 130,000 cases of trademark violation and counterfeiting, including a number of particularly serious cases, e.g. trademark violations or counterfeited trademarks for "Zhonghua" cigarettes, for "Forever," "Phoenix" and "Flying Pigeon" bicycles, for "Guizhou Maotai" wine, and for "Xingkaihe" ginseng. Effective protection was thus given to the lawful rights and interests of the registered trademark owners.

中国知识产权行政管理机关依据中国法律和中国加入或缔结的有关国际公约，坚持在适用法律上的国民待遇原则和对等原则，依法对外国人的知识产权进行保护。
China's intellectual property rights administrative organs, in accordance with Chinese laws and relevant international treaties to which China is a party, adhering to the principle of equal treatment for nationals and non-nationals and reciprocity, give protection to foreigners' intellectual property rights in accordance with the law. 
例如，浙江省专利管理机关就一起外国人提出的打火打专利侵权案件进行了公正处理，责令厂家停止侵权行为和赔偿损失。
For instance, the Zhejiang Provincial Patent Administration Office recently reached a just settlement in a complaint brought by a foreign plaintiff concerning unlicensed production of a cigarette lighter to which he held patent. The competent authorities ordered the factory concerned to cease all acts of infringement and compensate the foreigner for his losses. 
国家版权局查处了福建、广东等地十几家工艺美术品厂仿制外国公司玩具造型案、江苏一家电子工业公司翻版生产激光唱盘案。
The State Copyright Administration investigated and then dealt with a series of cases in which a dozen odd arts and crafts factories in Fujian and Guangdong had manufactured pirated toys copying several foreign companies' toy designs, and a case in which an electronics enterprise in Jiangsu was illegally producing compact discs.

中国知识产权行政管理机关在处理的涉外知识产权侵权案件中，依照职权主动查处的案件占有很大的比例。
A large proportion of the cases concerning violations of foreigners' intellectual property rights were investigated and dealt with by China's intellectual property protection administrative offices on their own initiative, acting in accordance with their prescribed functions and powers.

中国工商行政管理机关肩负维护经济秩序的职责，可以主动对市场进行检查，有效保护了商标注册人的权益。
China's administrative departments for industry and commerce have undertaken the responsibility of maintaining economic order and can make market investigations on their own initiative so as to effectively protect the rights of the registered trademark owners. 

如广东省各级工商行政管理机关，1988年以来共查处涉美侵权案301件。在这301件商标侵权案中，有三分之一是美方当事人投诉的，大部分是工商行政管理机关在市场检查中发现的或消费者检举的。知识产权行政管理机关秉公执法，坚决维护知识产权所有人的合法权益，赢得了许多外资或中外合资企业的赞扬。他们将绣(刻)有“清政廉洁，执法如山”、“秉公执法，扶正灭邪”、“秉公办理，保驾护航”、“公正严明，伪冒克星”、“执法严明，大公无私”的锦旗、金匾等赠送给中国工商行政管理机关，称赞办案人员“工作认真，行动果敢”、“办案速度之快在世界上是少有的”。
Since 1988, administrative organs for industry and commerce at various levels in Guangdong Province have investigated and dealt with 301 cases concerning the violation of US-owned trademarks. Out of these 301 cases, one third were filed by the American trademark owners, with the remaining cases being the product of market investigations by the administrative organs for industry and commerce or consumer complaints. China's intellectual property rights administrative offices are impartial, and firmly safeguard the lawful rights and interests of those who hold such rights. This has earned them praises from many foreign enterprises and joint ventures. Some of these companies presented the administrative departments for industry and commerce silk banners or gilt boards, bearing words of praise such as "Upright and honest, firm as a rock in administering justice," "Impartiality in enforcing the law, support right, eliminate wrong," "Just settlement, protection of commerce," "Strict and impartial justice, conquerer of fakes and frauds," and "Strict and impartial in executing the law, consummate impartiality." They praised the personnel handling the cases as "conscientious in work and resolute in action," "Such speed in handling a case is seldom encountered anywhere in the world," etc.
结 束 语
Concluding Remarks

改革开放的中国，日新月异。如今，从知识产权保护领域看中国，一些国际人士评价说，中国已步入了知识产权领域世界领先水平国家的行列。知识产权制度建设落后的历史在中国已经结束了。
As China implements its reform and opening to the outside world, it is changing with each passing day. Today more than a few international observers have come to the conclusion that in terms of intellectual property protection China has reached international advanced levels. China's backwardness in its intellectual property system is now a thing of the past.

然而，世上总有某些人视而不见中国的发展变化，不顾基本的事实，对中国知识产权保护现状妄加评论，说什么中国没有建立“充分、有效的知识产权制度”、“缺乏承担国际义务的能力”。对此论调，无需争辩，事实是最好的回答。
However, there remain some naysayers in the world seemingly willfully blind to China's development and transformation who incognizant of present realities pass improper judgements on the nation's current situation regarding intellectual property protection. They allege that China has not yet established a "full and effective intellectual property system," and that China "lacks the ability to undertake international obligations." Such unfounded opinions do not bear argument; the truth speaks for itself.

中国并不满足于已有的成就，中国作为一个发展中国家，在完善知识产权制度方面还有许多工作要做。由于中国建立现代知识产权制度的时间不长，全社会的知识产权意识还比较薄弱，有的地区和部门对保护知识产权的重要性缺乏足够认识，一些严重侵权行为不仅损害了权利人的合法权益，而且损害了法律的尊严。为此，中国在继续完善知识产权法律制度的同时，国务院作出了《关于进一步加强知识产权保护工作的决定》。可以确信，随着决定中各项重要举措的落实，中国的知识产权保护工作将迈上新的台阶。
Nonetheless, China cannot remain satisfied with the achievements it has already made. China is a developing country and still has much work towards optimizing its intellectual property system. This system in its modern form was established only a short time ago, and as a result, awareness of intellectual property rights remains underdeveloped in society at large. In some regions and in some governmental departments there is insufficient appreciation of the importance of intellectual property protection. Some serious acts of infringement have violated not only the legitimate rights and interests of the holder of the intellectual property right, but also the dignity of the law. Accordingly, even as the nation continues to otherwise improve the intellectual property legal system, the State Council has drawn up Decisions on Further Strengthening the Protection of Intellectual Property. China is confident that the implementation of all the important measures contained in the Decisions will mark a great new step forward in the nation's efforts to ensure the protection of intellectual property rights.

中国将继续积极推进知识产权领域的国际合作。
China will continue actively to promote international cooperation in the field of intellectual property. 

中国在建立和完善知识产权制度的过程中，得到了世界知识产权组织和国际知识产权界的积极帮助，中国也将一如既往地积极参加有关国际组织的活动，履行知识产权领域各项国际条约和协定中应尽的义务。
China itself has received active assistance from the World Intellectual Property Organization and from others working in the field in establishing and fine-tuning its intellectual property rights protection system. The nation will, as in the past, actively join in the activities of relevant international organizations and fulfil the obligations described in the international intellectual property treaties and agreements.

中国愿意在和平共处五项原则的基础上，根据平等互利原则与世界各国继续合作，为完善和发展国际知识产权制度共同努力，作出积极的贡献。
Operating on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and in accordance with the principle of equality and mutual benefit, China will continue to cooperate with the rest of the world's nations, working and making positive contributions towards the development and optimization of the international intellectual property system. 

中国的军备控制与裁军
China: Arms Control and Disarmament 
中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China
一九九五年十一月·北京
November 1995, Beijing

目录
Contents
前言
Foreword 
促进人类的和平与发展
Promoting Peace and Development for All Mankind 
裁减军队员额一百万
Military Personnel Reduced by One Million
维持低水平国防支出
Maintaining a Low Level of Defence Spending
和平利用军工技术
Peaceful Uses for Military Industrial Technologies
严格管制敏感材料与军事装备的转让
Strict Control over the Transfer of Sensitive Materials and Military Equipment
积极推动国际军备控制与裁军
Actively Promoting International Arms Control and Disarmament

结束语
Concluding Remarks
前言
Foreword 

值此纪念世界反法西斯战争和中国抗日战争胜利以及联合国成立五十周年之际，人们不应忘记，本世纪人类曾两度遭受世界大战的浩劫，战争不时给人类带来灾难和痛苦。
As the world marks the 50th anniversaries of the victories in the global anti-fascist war and China's War of Resistance Against Japan and the founding of the United Nations, it must not be forgotten that twice in this century mankind has suffered from the enormity of world war, that war has repeatedly brought man catastrophic suffering.

在新的国际形势下，军控与裁军作为国家安全政策的组成部分和减少战争危险的有效措施之一，日益受到国际社会的重视。
Given the new international situation, the importance of arms control and disarmament has become ever more apparent to the international community, both as a component of national security policies and as an effective measure to reduce the danger of war.

中国需要在和平环境中专心致志地进行社会主义现代化建设。
China needs a peaceful environment in order to be able to devote itself completely to its socialist modernization programme. 
基于和平与发展的愿望，中国积极维护国际和平、安全与稳定，高度重视军控与裁军，一贯反对军备竞赛，主张通过军控与裁军减少和消除战争危险。多年来，随着形势的变化，中国在保持必要防御力量的前提下，单方面实行了一系列裁减军备的措施：大幅度裁减军队员额；维持低水平国防支出；严格管制敏感材料、技术及军事装备的转让；全面实行国防科技工业的军转民等。中国作为一个发展中国家和联合国安理会常任理事国，还以许多现实、合理的主张，积极推动国际军控与裁军的进程，作出了自己应有的贡献。
Guided by its aspiration to peace and development, China has spared no effort to safeguard international peace, security and stability and afforded the greatest concern to arms control and disarmament. China has always opposed the arms race and advocated that the danger of war be lessened or eliminated through arms control and disarmament. As the international situation has changed, China, while retaining the precondition that the nation maintain necessary defence capabilities, has unilaterally adopted a series of measures aimed at disarmament. These include greatly reducing military staff, reducing defence spending, strictly controlling transfers of sensitive materials, technology and military equipment and converting defence technologies industry to civilian production. China has further made its due contributions as a developing nation and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, proffering many realistic, rational proposals geared to actively promote the international arms control and disarmament process.

中国在军控与裁军领域所作的努力向世人昭示：中国对军控与裁军问题的态度是积极、认真和负责任的，中国始终是维护世界和平、促进人类共同发展的一支可靠力量。
China's efforts towards arms control and disarmament have proven to the world that it is positive, sincere and responsible regards resolving this issue. China has been and always will remain a reliable force in the cause of safeguarding world peace and promoting mankind's common development.

促进人类的和平与发展　　
Promoting Peace and Development for All Mankind 

争取世界持久和平，创造全人类的幸福、文明、是世界人民的崇高理想，也是中国人民的真诚愿望。
Working for lasting world peace and creating a happy life and an advanced culture for all mankind, lofty ideals held by all the world's peoples, are likewise the sincerely held aspirations of the Chinese people.

中华民族酷爱和平，曾经为人类的和平和进步事业作出重大贡献。
The Chinese nation loves peace dearly and has made major contributions to peace and other progressive causes for all of mankind.

中国在近代历史上，备受帝国主义和殖民主义的侵略、瓜分，人民饱受凌辱。
Modern history has served as grim witness to China's great sufferings and the humiliation of the Chinese people as the result of imperialist and colonialist invasion and partition. 

为了摆脱列强的奴役和掠夺，无数中华儿女抛头颅、洒热血，前仆后继，最终在中国共产党的领导下赢得了民族解放和国家独立。
Countless Chinese sons and daughters shed their blood or laid down their lives to free the nation from this cruel bondage and plundering, advancing wave upon wave, until national liberation and independence were finally won under the leadership of the Communist Party of China. 
中国人民深知独立、主权和平等的可贵。
The Chinese people know only too well the true value of independence, sovereignty and equality.

中国谋求和平与发展的宗旨贯穿于新中国历次颁布的宪法之中。
China's guiding principle of seeking peace and development has been reflected in each of the constitutions the nation has adopted since the founding of New China. 

1949年9月，中国人民政治协商会议第一届全体会议通过的起着国家临时宪法作用的《中国人民政治协商会议共同纲领》明确规定：中国“拥护国际的持久和平和各国人民间的友好合作，反对帝国主义的侵略政策和战争政策。”1954年宪法规定：“在国际事务中，我国坚定不移的方针是为世界和平和人类进步的崇高目的而努力”。现行的1982年宪法再次确定：中国将“为维护世界和平和促进人类进步事业而努力”。
The Common Programme of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, which was passed at the First Plenary Session of the CPPCC in September, 1949 and served as a provisional state constitution, affirmed that China would "stand for lasting international peace and friendly cooperation among the people of the world, and oppose the imperialist policies of aggression and war." The Constitution of 1954 stipulated that "the steadfast policy of our country in international affairs is to work hard for the lofty goal of world peace and progress for mankind." The present Constitution, adopted in 1982, once again states that China "strives to safeguard world peace and promote the cause of human progress."

进入八十年代，世界和平力量迅速增长，和平与发展已成为时代的两大主题。
The forces for world peace have grown rapidly since the 1980s, and peace and development have become the two major issues of the day. 
中国科学地分析了国际形势的发展趋势和特点，认为经过全世界人民的共同努力，新的世界大战不仅可以推迟，而且有可能避免。
China's scientific analysis of the development trends and characteristics of the international situation has produced the conclusion that with the concerted efforts of people throughout the world, a new world war can not only be deferred but it can possibly be avoided as well. 
在和平与发展的新时代，摆在中国人民面前的首要任务是发展经济，改变国家贫穷落后的状况。
In the new era of peace and development, the task of first importance facing the Chinese people is to develop the economy and change the poverty and backwardness of the nation. 
中国确立了以经济建设为中心的发展战略。
China has focused its development strategy on economic construction.

中国的现代化事业是人类共同发展与进步事业的重要组成部分，中国的发展需要和平的国际环境，而一个繁荣稳定的中国会更加有利于世界的和平。
China's modernization programme is an important component of the cause for the common development and progress of mankind. A peaceful international environment is necessary for China's development and a prosperous and stable China, in turn, will increasingly benefit world peace. 
因此，中国坚定不移地奉行独立自主的和平外交政策：坚决维护国家的独立和主权，反对外来干涉；在和平共处五项原则的基础上广泛同世界各国建立和发展友好关系，加强同发展中国家的团结与合作，并积极发展与周边国家的睦邻关系；主张国家无论大小一律平等，反对任何形式的霸权主义和强权政治；倡导以和平方式解决国际争端，反对在国家关系中诉诸武力或以武力相威胁。
For this reason, China unwaveringly pursues a foreign policy of peace and independence. It resolutely protects its national independence and sovereignty and opposes foreign interference; seeks to establish and develop extensive, friendly relations with all the world's countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, strengthen unity and cooperation with developing countries and actively develop good-neighbourly relations with bordering nations; stands for the proposition that all nations, big or small, are equal and opposes hegemonism and power politics in any form; advocates the settlement of international disputes through peaceful means; and opposes the threat or use of force in international relations.

中国的国防政策是防御性的，基本目标是巩固国防，抵御外敌侵略，捍卫国家领土、领空、领海主权和海洋权益，维护国家统一和安全。中国的国防建设服从和服务于国家经济建设大局，坚持走“平战结合”、“军民结合”的发展道路。中国实行积极防御军事战略，坚持人民战争思想。中国不谋求世界或地区的霸权，中国不在外国派驻军队，不在外国建立军事基地，中国的国防建设不针对任何国家，不对任何国家构成威胁。
China's national defence policy is defensive in nature. Its basic goals are to consolidate national defence, resist foreign aggression, defend the nation's sovereignty over its land, sea and air as well as its maritime rights and interests, and safeguard national unity and security. National defence work in China is subordinate to and in service of the nation's overall economic construction, adhering to the principles of "combining peacetime with wartime" and "integrating the army with the people." In terms of military strategy, China follows a policy of positive defence and adheres to the idea of people's war. China does not seek world or regional hegemony. China does not station any troops or set up any military bases in any foreign country. China's national defence construction is not directed against any country, and thus, does not pose a threat to any country.

在贯彻国家对外政策和进行国防建设的过程中，中国重视军控与裁军的积极作用，认为军控与裁军有助于减少和消除战争危险，增加国际和平与安全因素；有利于改善国与国之间的关系，增进各国之间的相互信任；有利于把更多的资源、资金和技术用于促进经济和社会的发展。
During the course of foreign policy implementation and national defence construction, China attaches importance to the active role of arms control and disarmament, holding that arms control and disarmament are conducive to reducing and eliminating the danger of war and increasing factors for international peace and security. Such controls and reductions will help improve relations and mutual trusamong nations and will enable the contribution of more resources, capital and technology to economic and social development.

在国际社会长期不懈努力下，近年来，国际军控与裁军取得了较大进展。
Protracted, unremitting efforts by the international community have led to great progress in international arms control and disarmament in the past few years. 
但是，人们要清醒地看到，国际军控与裁军的任务还十分艰巨和复杂，核裁军虽取得了一些进展，但保持着世界上数量最多、质量最精核武器的核大国，既未放弃核威慑政策，也没有停止对核武器和外空武器包括导弹防御系统的发展。此外，它们一方面在国际市场上竞相倾销先进武器甚至以武器转让为手段干涉别国内政；另一方面则采取歧视性的防扩散和军控措施，将军控予头指向发展中国家。
Nonetheless, mankind should remain coolly cognizant that the path to international arms control and disarmament is still extremely complex and difficult. While some progress has been made in nuclear disarmament, the major nuclear powers, with the world's most sophisticated and largest quantity of nuclear weapons in hand, have neither abandoned their policy of nuclear deterrence nor stopped the development of nuclear weapons and outer space weapons including guided missile defence systems. On the one hand, they vie with one another in dumping their advanced weapons on the international market, even using weapons transfers as a means to interfere in other nations' domestic affairs. On the other, they resort to discriminative anti-proliferation and arms control measures, directing the spearhead of arms control at the developing countries.

中国认为国际社会应促进公正、合理、全面、均衡的军控与裁军，并遵循下述基本原则：
China holds that the international community should promote fair, rational, comprehensive and balanced arms control and disarmament and observe the following principles:

各国应遵守《联合国宪章》维护国际和平与安全的宗旨和原则，以及有关的国际法准则。在争取军控与裁军的同时，必须制止侵略，公正合理地解决地区冲突，不得在国际关系中诉诸武力或以武力相威胁。在国际关系中消除霸权主义和强权政治，为裁军创造有利的国际气氛和条件。
All nations should follow the purposes and principles for safeguarding international peace and security contained in the Charter of the United Nations and other relevant international legal norms. At the same time arms control and disarmament is worked for, aggression must be curbed. Regional conflicts must be fairly and rationally resolved and force or threat of force should not be used in international relations. Hegemonism and power politics should be eliminated in international relations, so as to create an international environment and conditions favourable to disarmament.

裁军的最终目标是全面禁止和彻底销毁核武器和其他大规模杀伤性武器，包括化学武器和生物武器，全面禁止外空武器，同时根据实际情况削减常规军备。拥有最多和最精良核与常规武库的大国，在实行军控与裁军方面负有特殊责任。
The ultimate goal of disarmament is the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction (including chemical and biological weapons), the complete prohibition of outer space weapons, and reductions in conventional arms as befits actual circumstances. The big powers, possessors of the largest and most sophisticated nuclear and conventional arsenals, bear a special responsibility in arms control and disarmament 

防止大规模杀伤性武器的扩散。防扩散本身不是终极目的，只有全面禁止和彻底销毁此类武器才能有效防止扩散；防扩散不应妨碍各国和平利用科学技术的正当权益，更不能因此而限制和损害发展中国家的经济和科技发展。
Preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The prevention of proliferation is not in itself the ultimate goal. Only through complete prohibition and thorough destruction of such weapons can proliferation be effectively prevented. Preventing proliferation should neither present an obstacle to the just rights and interests of all countries in the peaceful use of science and technology nor restrict or harm economic, scientific and technological development in developing countries.

各国均有保持正当国防能力和合法自卫的权利，实行军控与裁军的各个阶段都应保证所有国家的安全不受损害。国家不分大小都有权在平等的基础上参加讨论和解决军控与裁军问题。国际军控与裁军的实行不得损害任何国家的独立和主权，不得使用武力或以武力相威胁，不得干涉任何国家的内政。
All nations have the right to maintaining an appropriate national defence capability and to legitimate self-defence. It is necessary at all stages of the arms control and disarmament process to ensure all nations from sustaining damage to their security. All nations, big or small, have the right to join in discussions and decisions on arms control and disarmament on an equal basis. The implementation of international arms control and disarmament must not impair the independence and sovereignty of any nation, entail the use of force or the threat of force, or interfere with the internal affairs of any nation.
    各国尤其是发达国家应严格管制敏感材料、技术及军事装备的转让，并采取克制的态度，停止不负责任的武器转让。
All countries, particularly developed nations, should strictly control the transfer of sensitive materials, technologies and military equipment, practise restraint and halt the irresponsible transfer of weapons.
    各国应赞同、尊重并支持国家间根据地区的实际情况，在自行协商、谈判和自愿协议的基础上采取的军控与裁军措施。
All nations should endorse, respect and support the arms control and disarmament measures adopted after voluntary consultation, negotiation and agreement between nations and in light of actual regional circumstances.
    多年来，中国正是本着上述基本原则，承担在军控与裁军领域所负的国际义务和责任，为促进人类的和平与发展，作出了自己应有努力。
For many years China has adhered to these basic principles, bearing its due share of international arms control and disarmament obligations and responsibilities, working hard to promote peace and development for humanity.

裁减军队员额一百万　　
Military Personnel Reduced by One Million
    
1985年5月，中国郑重宣布，中国人民解放军将裁减员额100万。这是中国多次单方面裁军活动中最有代表性的一次，表明中国积极推动军控与裁军的决心。这与当时国际上两大军事集团的军备竞赛形成明显对比。
In May, 1985, China solemnly declared that the People's Liberation Army (PLA) would reduce military personnel by one million. This was the most representative of China's many unilateral moves to disarmament, giving proof of the nation's determination to actively promote arms control and disarmament. This action stood in sharp contrast to the arms race pursued by the two major military blocs existing in the world at that time.
    中国疆域辽阔、人口众多，保持一定规模的常备军是中国国家安全的正当需要。中国人民解放军是中国共产党领导下的人民军队，其任务是巩固国防抵抗侵略，制止颠覆和分裂，保卫祖国，保卫人民的和平劳动，参加国家建设事业，努力为人民服务。
China's vast land and large population have justified the necessity of maintaining a standing army of a certain size in order to maintain national security. The PLA is a people's army led by the Communist Party of China. Its duty is to consolidate national defence, resist aggression, curb subversion and efforts to split the nation, defend the motherland, safeguard the people's peaceful labour, join in building the country and strive to serve the people.

中国在确保国家安全利益的前提下，始终将军队员额控制在最低限度。
While meeting the precondition of ensuring the interests of the national security, China has always kept its military personnel at a minimum level.

新中国在成立后的一段较长时间里，一直面临着帝国主义、霸权主义的孤立、封锁、颠覆和破坏，因此，中国人民解放军经常处于临战的戒备状态。即使在这种情况下，中国也积极努力控制军备，分别在1955年和1958年进行了两次较大规模的裁军行动。八十年代，中国的安全环境有了较大改善。为了集中力量加快经济建设和进一步加强军队质量建设，中国军队建设指导思想实行战略性转变，从过去随时准备应付大规模侵略战争转变到和平时期建设的轨道上来。为此，中国采取了大规模的裁军行动。
For a long period following the founding of the People's Republic, China was subject to isolation, blockade, subversion and sabotage by the imperialists and hegemonists, and, as a result, the PLA was often on a combat-ready alert. Even when faced with such circumstances, China made great efforts towards arms control and twice, in 1955 and 1958, effected large-scale disarmament. The 1980s saw marked improvement in China's security environment. In order to concentrate on rapid economic development and to further raise the quality of its armed forces, the precept guiding China's army-building was strategically shifted from always being prepared against a massive war of invasion to peacetime construction. China carried out large-scale disarmament in order to effect this goal.
    作为八十年代大规模单方面裁军行动的序幕，从1982年到1984年，中国对军队进行了精简整编和体制调整。1985年5月，中国决定裁减军队员额100万。这一行动范围之广、裁减幅度之大，为当时国际军控与裁军领域所罕见。
As a prelude to this extensive unilateral disarmament, the Chinese armed forces were reduced, reorganized and restructured between 1982 and 1984. In May, 1985, China decided to reduce its military personnel by one million. Action on this scale was rare in the sphere of contemporary international arms control and disarmament.
    裁减员额。到1987年，中国人民解放军的总员额由423.8万人减到323.5万人。之后，又作了进一步的裁减，至1990年，全军总员额减到319.9万人，共裁减员额103.9万人，占裁减前总员额的24.5%，百万裁军的任务已超额完成。
Reducing personnel. By 1987, the 4.238-million-strong PLA had been reduced to 3.235 million. Subsequently, still further reductions were made. By 1990, the PLA manpower was reduced to 3.199 million, overshooting the declared target of one million men. The 1.039 million demobilized soldiers represented 24.5 percent of the army's original strength.
    撤并机构。大军区由11个撤并为7个。全军经过撤销、合并、降级、改制，共减少团级以上单位5900多个。
Dismantling and merging portions of the military organization. Reapportionment and merger reduced the number of military area commands from eleven to seven. More than 5,900 units above the regimental level were dispersed through dismantling, merging, demoting or reforming.
    实行文职制度。将科研、工程技术、教育、文艺、卫生等系统的大部分现役军官改为军内文职人员。
Adoption of a civil position system. Most of the officers on active duty working in scientific research, engineering, education, literature and arts and public health were reclassified as working in civil positions within the army.
    削减武器装备。全军共削减各种火炮近10000门；各型坦克1100余辆；各型飞机近2500架；各型舰艇610余艘。
Reductions in weaponry. Throughout the armed forces 10,000 artillery pieces of various kinds were removed from service, along with over 1,100 tanks, approximately 2,500 airplanes, and over 610 naval vessels.
    开放部分军用设施。全国共有101个军用机场、29座军用港口向社会开放，并将部分军事设施改为民用。
Opening certain military facilities to the public. Nationwide, 101 military airports and 29 military harbours have been opened to the public, and some military facilities have been put to civilian use.
    在当时冷战尚未结束，美苏裁军谈判长期未果的情况下，中国单方面大规模裁减军队员额的行动，不仅有利于促使当时的东西方两个集团减缓军备竞赛的势头，缓和国际紧张局势，而且有助于在世界各国间逐步建立相互信赖的气氛，改善军控与裁军的环境。中国此次裁军行动对推动国际军控与裁军进程作出了重要贡献。
China's unilateral, massive reduction of its armed forces took place at a time when the cold war was still on and the protracted disarmament talks between the U.S. and the Soviet Union were still without outcome. This action was not only conducive to slowing the arms race between the two major blocs, the East and West, and to the relaxation of international tension at the time, but also beneficial to the gradual creation of an atmosphere of mutual trust among the world's nations, and the improvement of the environment for arms control and disarmament and was thus a major contribution towards promoting the process of the international arms control and disarmament.
维持低水平国防支出　　
Maintaining a Low Level of Defence Spending
    中国一贯注重合理的国防费规模，依据国家财力可能，在综合平衡的前提下适当安排国防费用，保障重点，合理使用，厉行节约，提高效益，用有限的经费维持国防建设的最低需要。
China has consistently stressed rationally scaled expenditure on defence. The costs of defence are appropriately allocated based on the nation's financial capacities, while retaining the premise of overall balance. Key areas are guaranteed attention, funds are rationally used and strict economy practised so as to ensure maximum benefit and be sure that the minimum requirements for national defence work are met within the limited budget. 

改革开放以来，中国坚持国防建设服从和服务于国家经济建设的大局，对国防支出作了较大幅度的调整和压缩，严格控制国防支出。
Since the initiation of the reform and opening policy, China has placed work in defence in a position subordinate to and in service of overall national economic construction. Relatively major reapportionments and reductions have been made so as to strictly control defence spending.
    中国对国防费的管理是严肃认真的，始终坚持严格控制、严格管理、严格监督的原则，建立健全了完善的管理体制和法规制度。中国的国防费预算、决算由全国人民代表大会审查批准，一经批准，必须严格执行。为保证国防支出的严格执行和合理使用，国家和军队的审计机关对国防费拨款及其使用效益实施审查、监督。
China has consistently adopted a serious-minded attitude towards the management of spending on defence. A complete administrative and regulatory system tightly geared to the principles of strict control, strict management and strict supervision has been established and fine tuned. China's defence budget and final accounts are examined and approved by the National People's Congress and must be strictly implemented once approved. The state and military auditing departments examine and supervise defence appropriations and the results thereby produced so as to ensure that defence expenditure is strictly implemented and rationally used.
    1994年中国国防费为550.71亿元人民币。其构成为：人员生活费187.74亿元，占34.09%，主要用于军官、士兵和职工的工资、伙食、服装等；活动维持费188.45亿元，占34.22%，主要用于部队训练、工程设施建设和维护、水电、取暖等；装备经费174.52亿元，占31.69%，主要用于装备的科研、试验、采购、维修、运输和储存等。从上述国防费实际构成比例可以看出，维持费用占了大部分。这些维持费，除保障人员生活和正常活动外，还有相当一部分经费用于社会性支出，其中用于退役军官供养、军队子弟学校和幼儿园的经费近37亿元。
In 1994, China's expenditure on national defence totalled 55.071 billion RMB yuan; 34.09 percent (18.774 billion yuan) was spent on living expenses, principally on salaries, food and uniforms; 34.22 percent (18.845 billion yuan) was spent on maintenance of activities, principally military training, construction and maintenance of facilities, water, electricity and heating; 31.69 percent (17.452 billion yuan) was spent on equipment, including research, test, purchase, maintenance, transportation and storage. Thus, maintenance-type activities absorb the largest portion of the defence budget. Moreover, of this expenditure, in addition to that spent to ensure the personnel's living and normal activities a considerable sum, nearly 3.7 billion yuan, is spent to fund activities associated with social welfare, such as pensions for retired officers and schools and kindergartens for children of military personnel.
    勤俭建军、艰苦奋斗是人民军队的优良传统。中国人民解放军除开展清仓利库和修旧利废等群众性节约活动外，还从事一些力所能及的农副工业生产和经营活动。这些主要是为了解决随军家属和子女就业，改善基层部队物质文化生活，支援国家经济建设。
Plain living and hard working is the people's army's fine tradition. The PLA economizes by frequently inventorying warehouses to make the best use of stored goods and repairing rather than replacing old facilities and equipment. In addition, in so far as is within its capacity it joins in agricultural, sideline and industrial production and engages in business. These activities are primarily undertaken to provide employment for the families of military personnel, to improve life culturally and materially in grass-roots units and to support the nation's overall economic construction.

中国国防支出始终维持在确保国家安全所需的低水平上。
China's expenditure on national defence has consistently been kept at a low level necessary to ensure that the requirements for national security are met. 

1979年—1994年，国防费的绝对值年平均增长6.22%，而此期间全国零售物价总指数年平均上涨7.7%。如保持1979年国防费实际购买水平，十六年需拨国防费5812.94亿元，而实际拨4164.99亿元，仅占需拨款的71.65%。为保证物价上涨条件下军人生活水平不降低，国防费中人员生活所需支出大幅度增加。近年来，中国年度国防费的增加，主要为弥补物价上涨和保障人员生活。
Between 1979 and 1994 defence spending increased 6.22 percent annually in absolute terms. Over that same period, the general retail price index of commodities increased 7.7 percent annually. During these sixteen years an expenditure of 581.294 billion yuan would have been needed to maintain the 1979 level of defence spending. However, only 71.65 percent of this figure, 416.499 billion yuan, was appropriated. Expenditure on personnel's living expenses was increased by a large margin to keep up with the spiralling costs of living. In recent years, increases in annual defence spending have for the most part simply matched price increases or gone to ensure the standard of living of personnel.

与世界其他国家已对外公布的国防费相比，中国国防支出的总体水平是相当低的。
China has a fairly low level of defence spending compared with that announced by other countries. 
按人民币对美元的年平均汇价计算，1994年中国国防费仅为63.9亿美元，只相当于美国的2.3%、英国的18.3%、法国的18.6%、日本的13.9%。若按人口计算，1994年中国人均国防费只有5.36美元。
It spent only US$ 6.39 billion on defence in 1994 (calculated at the average annual exchange rate of the RMB yuan to the US dollar), 2.3 percent that spent by the United States, 18.3 percent that by Britain, 18.6 percent that by France and 13.9 percent that by Japan. Per capita defence spending by that year was only US$ 5.36.
    中国国防支出的低水平，不仅反映在国防费的绝对值上，而且也反映在国家国防负担的相对比例上。1979—1994年，国防费占国内生产总值的比例从5.6%下降到1.3%；国防费占国家财政总支出的比例也从18.5%下降到9.5%。1994年，中国国防费占国内生产总值的比例为1.3%，而美国为4.2%，英国为3.6%，法国为3.18%；中国国防费占国家财政总支出的比例为9.5%，而美国为18.9%，英国为9.64%，法国为13.6%。
China's spending on defence is low in relative terms as well as absolute terms. In 1979, defence expenditure in China accounted for 5.6 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP); in 1994, 1.3 percent. This may be compared with 4.2 percent in the United States, 3.6 percent in Britain and 3.18 percent in France. Again, in 1979, defence accounted for 18.5 percent of total expenditure by the Chinese government; in 1994, 9.5 percent. In the United States this figure stood at 18.9 percent, in Britain 9.64 percent and in France 13.6 percent.
    以上事实说明，中国的国防建设是低投入型的。今后只要不出现严重威胁中国国家主权和安全的情况，中国的国防费就不会有大幅度实质性的增加，中国永远不会威胁、侵略别国。
As these facts make clear, China has a pattern of low expenditure on defence. As long as there is no serious threat to the nation's sovereignty or security, China will not increase its defence spending substantially or by a large margin. It will never threaten or invade any other country.
和平利用军工技术　　
 Peaceful Uses for Military Industrial Technologies 
    中国于七十年代末开始有计划地全面实施国防科技工业军转民。中国的军转民是国家发展战略的组成部分，不仅促进了国家经济的发展，而且也有助于巩固中国军控与裁军的成果。
Beginning at the end of the 1970s, China began a planned and comprehensive transfer of defence technologies to civilian use. This transfer is part of the nation's development strategy and will not only promote national economic development but also help to consolidate China's achievements in arms control and disarmament.
    在实施军转民过程中，中国对军品科研生产能力进行了大幅度调整，将三分之二的军品科研生产能力转向为经济建设服务，并且改革国防科技工业管理体制，调整国防科技工业产业、产品结构，将国防科技成果转为民用。
During the course of this transfer, China has effected a major readjustment in military products research and production capacity, converting two thirds to serving economic construction. In addition, it has reformed the management system and the industrial and product structures of the defence industry, putting its accomplishments in defence technologies to civilian use.
    中国于1989年成立了由国家计划委员会、国家科学技术委员会和国防科学技术工业委员会组成的军转民联络小组。国防科技工业相对集中的省、市相继成立了军转民的协调指导小组，加强组织协调，将军转民有机地纳入国家、地区以及行业的各项发展计划之中。现在，主管军工生产的原有关政府部门已改为行业总公司，按社会主义市场经济原则逐步发展成为科研、生产、经营的经济实体。
In 1989, the central government established a "civilian applications of military technology liason group" comprised of the State Planning Commission, the State Scientific and Technological Commission and the Commission of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defence. In provinces and municipalities with concentrations of defence industries, leading groups have been established to coordinate the transfer from military to civilian use, strengthening organization in the organic inclusion of such transfers in national, regional and industrial development plans. Today, the government departments formerly in charge of military production have already been changed into general corporations within their respective trades and, in accordance with the principles of the socialist market economy, will step by step develop into economic entities engaging in research, production and business.
    为了扶持军转民，中国在“六五”(1981—1985年)和“七五”(1986—1990年)两个国民经济和社会发展计划期间，对军转民技术改造项目投入约40亿元人民币，在“八五”(1991—1995年)期间又投入100多亿元人民币。军工企业同等享受实行国家关于搞好企业经营的一系列优惠政策和改革措施，实行承包经营责任制，除按承包合同规定向政府交纳部分利润和税金外，其余民品生产利润多用于扩大民品生产和改善职工生活。
During the Sixth (1981-1985) and Seventh (1986-1990) Five-Year Plans for economic and social development, China invested approximately four billion yuan in projects aimed at effecting the transfer. During the Eighth Five-Year Plan (1991-1995), an additional more than ten billion yuan has been invested. The military industrial enterprises enjoy the same series of preferential policies and reform measures the central government offers for facilitating the operation of enterprises and follow the contract responsibility system. As is stipulated in their contracts, these enterprises will surrender a portion of their profits to the government in addition to taxes. The remaining profits produced by civilian goods will be mostly used to boost production of such goods and improve the lives of those working for the enterprises.
    中国国防科技工业从原来的单一军品产业结构，逐步过渡到军民品多种生产的模式，不仅保证了和平时期国防建设的需要，而且还提供了高质量的民用工业品和消费品，在国民经济建设中发挥了重要作用。国防科技工业部门在国家产业政策的引导下，通过技术改造和新建的方式，目前已拥有达到经济规模的民品生产线约450条。国防科技工业部门的民品产值以20%的速度逐年递增，占国防科技工业总产值的比例，由1979年的8%增长到1994年的80%左右。
Transforming China's defence industry gradually from its former incarnation as a monolithic producer of military products to today's diversified producer of products for military and civilian consumers has ensured that the needs of peacetime national defence construction are met, while at the same time producing high-quality industrial and consumer goods for society at large, thus playing an important role in national economic construction. As a result of technical transformation and new construction under the direction of the national industrial policy, approximately 450 production lines are now operating in the defence industry at a certain economic scale producing civilian consumer goods. The output value of civilian consumer goods produced by defence industry departments has been increasing 20 percent per annum and in 1994 represented approximately 80 percent of the total output value of such departments as opposed to 8 percent in 1979.
    目前，中国国防科技工业已能生产50余大类、15000多种民用产品。产品涉及通信、能源、交通、轻纺、医疗卫生和工程建筑等行业领域，其中有的已占全国产品产量的相当比例，如汽车占全国产量的9%，摩托车占60%，铁路货车占26%，煤炭综合采挖设备占24%。中国国防科技工业利用军工技术和设备研制生产了运五、运七、运八、运十二等民用飞机；与外国企业合作生产了MD—82、MD—90等大型客机；自行研制了10亿次银河II型巨型计算机及应用软件；设计并建造了30万千瓦的秦山核电站；建造了穿梭油轮、多用途集装箱船和大型风冷集装箱船等一系列高新技术产品。1984—1994年，中国发射了11颗民用应用卫星。通讯卫星的发射，使中国卫星电视覆盖率达到82%；卫星气象系统提高了天气预报的准确率，大幅度减少了由于自然灾害造成的经济损失；卫星遥感技术在国家建设中产生了很大的经济效益。
Today, such enterprises have the capacity to produce more than 15,000 products for civilian use in over 50 categories. Products include those used in telecommunications, energy resources, transportation, textiles and other light industries, medicine and health, and engineering and building industries. Outputs of some products have made a substantial contribution to the nation's total, for example automobiles (9 percent), motorcycles (60 percent), freight trains (26 percent) and coal excavation equipment (24 percent). In addition, these enterprises have used military facilities and technology to bring many products and projects from the drawing board to production including the Yun-5, Yun-7, Yun-8 and Yun-12 civil aircraft, the MD-82 and MD-90 large passenger airplanes (produced in cooperation with a foreign partner), the Galaxy-II supercomputer capable of handling 1 billion operations per second and its application software, the 300,000-KW Qinshan Nuclear Power Station, shuttle oil tankers, multi-function container ships, large air-cooled container ships and other new and hi-tech products. Between 1984 and 1994, China launched 11 satellites for civilian applications. Newly launched communications satellites have increased satellite television coverage in China to 82 percent. The meteorological satellite system has brought increased accuracy to weather forecasting, substantially reducing economic losses due to natural calamities. Satellite remote sensing technology has produced great economic benefits.
    为了有计划地将国防科技成果转为民用，中国成立了国防科技成果应用中心，并建立了成果推广网。
China has established a centre for the application of the national defence technologies and a network to disseminate products and information in order to better convert such technologies to civilian use in a planned way. 
十多年来，已有2500余项国防科技成果解密转为民用，极大地推动了相关领域的技术进步和发展。
In the last dozen or so years, more than 2,500 defence technologies have been released for civilian use, greatly promoting technological progress and development in relevant fields.
    中国国防科技工业在开发民品过程中，还开展广泛的国际合作，到1994年，已建立各类中外合资企业300余家。
The defence industry has cooperated extensively with foreign partners in developing products for civilian use. By 1994, over 300 such joint ventures had been established in China.
    中国利用军工技术造福人类的举措受到国际社会的重视。
China's efforts to benefit mankind through military technology have drawn the attention of the international community. 
中国与联合国共同在北京和香港举办的军转民研讨会，得到国际社会的广泛响应。1993年香港研讨会发表的军转民宣言认为，国际和平与经济的持续发展是世界各国人民的共同愿望，裁军与和平相辅相成，军转民是推动裁军和促进和平与发展不可缺少的环节。
The seminars on the transfer of military technology to civilian use jointly held by China and the United Nations in Beijing and in Hong Kong received positive worldwide response. The declaration on such transfers issued by the 1993 Hong Kong seminar stated that world peace and sustained economic development are the common wish of all the world's people; disarmament and peace are complementary, and the transfer of military technology to civilian use is an indispensable link in the chain of promotion of disarmament, and the resulting promotion of peace and development.
    中国实施军转民不仅促进了国家经济建设，而且也为世界各国提供了在和平时期将军事工业转为民用的成功经验。
The transfer of military technology to civilian use has contributed to national economic construction in China and moreover provided various countries in the world with successful experience for such conversion in peacetime.
严格管制敏感材料与军事装备的转让　　
Strict Control over the Transferof Sensitive Materials and Military Equipment 
    敏感材料与军事装备的转让是国际军控与裁军领域的重要问题，中国对此一贯采取严肃认真的态度。
The transfer of sensitive materials and military equipment is a major issue in the field of international arms control and disarmament and one which China has consistently approached with the utmost gravity.
    中国支持《不扩散核武器条约》关于防止核武器扩散、推进核裁军进程和促进和平利用核能国际合作的三大目标。中国一贯主张全面禁止和彻底销毁核武器，奉行不主张、不鼓励、不从事核武器扩散和不帮助别国发展核武器的政策。中国同时认为，防止核扩散不能无视各国、特别是广大发展中国家和平利用核能的正当权益和要求，更不能采取双重标准，以防止核扩散为借口限制和损害发展中国家和平利用核能。
China supports the three major goals set forth in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT): preventing the spread of nuclear weapons, accelerating nuclear disarmament, and promoting international cooperation in the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. China has consistently stood for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, pursuing a policy of not supporting, encouraging or engaging in the proliferation of nuclear weapons and not assisting any other country in the development of such weapons. At the same time, China holds that preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons should not proceed without due regard for the just rights and interests of all countries in the peaceful use of nuclear energy, particularly in the case of developing countries. There must not be a double standard whereby anti-nuclear proliferation is used as a pretext to limit or retard the peaceful use of nuclear energy by developing nations.
    中国认为，国际原子能机构的保障监督制度是维护《不扩散核武器条约》有效性的重要组成部分。中国在加入该条约之前即承诺履行该机构规约的义务，包括保障监督的义务。1992年中国加入该条约后，严格履行条约关于保障监督等各项义务，并与国际原子能机构在这些方面进行充分合作。
China holds that the safeguard regime of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is an important component of the efforts to assure the effectiveness of the NPT. Even prior to acceding to the treaty, China undertook to fulfill the obligations stipulated by the IAEA Statute, including the obligation to apply IAEA safeguard. Since 1992 when it became a party to the treaty, it has strictly fulfilled all its obligations under the Treaty, including the obligation to cooperate fully with the IAEA in safeguard application. 
中国的核出口遵循三项原则：仅用于和平目的；接受国际原子能机构的保障监督；未经中国允许不得向第三国转让。中国的核出口由政府指定的专门公司经营，有关政府部门对出口申请逐案审批。中国出口的核材料和核设备均提交国际原子能机构保障监督。中国从未出口过铀浓缩、后处理和重水生产等敏感技术。
China follows three principles regarding nuclear exports: exports serving peaceful use only, accepting IAEA's safeguards and no retransfers to a third country without China's consent. Only specialized government-designated companies can handle nuclear exports and in each instance they must apply for approval from relevant governmental departments. All exports of nuclear materials and equipment will be subject to IAEA safeguard. China has never exported sensitive technologies such as those for uranium enrichment, reprocessing and heavy water production.
    为支持国际原子能机构的保障监督工作，1991年11月，中国正式宣布在连续的基础上向该机构通报中国向无核武器国家出口或从无核武器国家进口大于1有效公斤核材料的情况。1993年7月，中国正式承诺在自愿的基础上向该机构通报所有核材料的进出口、核设备及有关非核材料的出口情况。
With a view to supporting IAEA safeguard, in November, 1991, China officially declared that on a continuing basis it would report to the IAEA any export to or import from non-nuclear-weapon states involving nuclear materials of one effective kilogramme or above. In July, 1993, China formally promised that it would voluntarily report to the agency any imports or exports of nuclear materials, and all exports of nuclear equipment and related non-nuclear materials.
    1985年，中国宣布自愿将部分民用核设施提交国际原子能机构实施保障监督。1988年，中国与该机构签订了自愿保障监督协定。根据协定，中国向国际原子能机构提供了自愿交保设施的清单，并建立了对该机构保障监督的核材料进行衡算和控制的系统。该系统由国家主管部门、接受保障的核设施单位和技术支持单位负责监督、管理和运行。国家主管部门负责组织实施中国和国际原子能机构缔结的保障协定。核设施单位负责按协定要求建立测量系统和记录、报告制度，并接受国际原子能机构视察员对设施的现场视察。
In 1985, China declared that it would of its own free will submit part of its civilian nuclear facilities to the IAEA for safeguards. In 1988 China and the IAEA signed an agreement on voluntary safeguard, under which China provided the IAEA with a listing of facilities subject to such safeguard and established SSAC. The system is supervised, administered and operated respectively by the competent government department, the facility concerned and technological support unit. The competent government department is responsible for organizing the implementation of the safeguard agreement between China and the IAEA. The nuclear facility management is responsible for establishing measurement, recording and reporting regimes in line with the requirements of the agreement, as well as receiving on-site investigations by IAEA inspectors.
    中国一贯主张全面禁止和彻底销毁化学武器。中国不生产、不拥有化学武器。中国是《关于禁止发展、生产、储存和使用化学武器及销毁此种武器的公约》的首批签署国，并以认真和建设性的态度参加了禁止化武组织筹委会的工作。
China has consistently advocated the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of chemical weapons. It does not produce or possess chemical weapons. China was in the first group of countries to sign the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, and joined in the work of the Preparatory Commission of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in a conscientious and constructive manner. 
中国在历史上曾深受化学武器之害，在领土上至今还有大量侵华日军遗弃的化学武器。这些化学武器仍在危害当地人民的生命安全和生存环境。中国要求，在别国遗弃化学武器的国家应按公约规定，尽快彻底销毁所有遗弃化学武器。
China itself suffered greatly from chemical weapons in the past. Large quantities of chemical weapons abandoned by Japanese aggressor troops are found in China to this day, which still threaten the safety and lives and the living environment of the local people. China demands that, in keeping with the stipulations of the convention, the country leaving chemical weapons in another country destroy all such weapons as soon as possible. 
中国希望公约早日生效，并得以全面和有效地实施，以使人类早日摆脱化学武器的威胁，实现无化学武器的世界。
China hopes that the convention will go into effect at an early date and be thoroughly and effectively implemented, so as to free mankind as soon as possible from the threat of chemical weapons and bring about a world free of such weapons.
    中国是民用化工大国，对可用于生产化学武器的化学品及其技术和设备的出口持慎重、负责的态度，不出口以制造化学武器为目的的化学品及其技术和设备。为确保中国出口的化学品及其生产技术和设备不被用于制造化学武器，中国政府制定了可用于生产化学武器的化学品及其生产技术和设备的出口管理规定和措施：参照公约化学品附表制定了化学品出口控制清单；清单化学品及其生产技术和设备的进出口由化学工业部统一归口管理；有关进出口业务由化学工业部和对外贸易经济合作部指定专门的企业经营；有关进出口的审批、发放许可证及查验等工作，由化学工业部、对外贸易经济合作部、海关总署等有关部门共同负责。中国要求进口国政府保证，从中国进口的有关物品不用于生产化学武器、不向第三国转让。
China has a massive civilian chemical industry. It is, however, very cautious and responsible regards the export of chemicals that could be used to manufacture chemical weapons and related technologies and equipment, refusing such exports if they are to be used for the purpose of manufacturing chemical weapons. In order to ensure these items if exported not to be used in the production of chemical weapons, the Chinese government has drafted regulations and measures for the control of their exportation. A detailed list of chemicals subject to export control has been drawn up in accordance with the Verification Annex of the convention. Import and export of chemicals on this list and technologies and equipment used in their manufacture are under the centralized management of the Ministry of Chemical Industry (MCI). Business related to such imports and exports is handled by specialized enterprises designated by MCI and the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation (MOFTEC). MCI, MOFTEC and the General Administration of Customs (GAC) take joint responsibility for examining and approving imports and exports, issuing licenses and making inspections. China insists that the governments of importing countries provide assurances that the relevant goods imported from China not be used to manufacture chemical weapons or retransferred to a third country.
    中国一贯主张全面禁止和彻底销毁生物武器，既反对任何国家生产生物武器，也反对任何国家以任何方式扩散此种武器。1984年，中国参加了《禁止细菌(生物)及毒素武器的发展、生产及储存以及销毁这类武器的公约》，认真、全面地履行所承担的公约义务。1987年以来，中国一直按该公约审议会的决定，逐年向联合国报告与公约有关的资料和情况。中国支持有助于加强公约有效性的措施，并将积极参加公约特设工作组关于促进国际合作、加强信任和核查等措施的讨论。
China has consistently advocated a complete prohibition and thorough destruction of biological weapons. It opposes the production of biological weapons by any country and their proliferation in any form by any country. In 1984 China acceded to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, and since that date it has fully and conscientiously fulfilled its obligations under the convention. Since 1987 China has year after year reported to the United Nations on convention-related information and data in accordance with the decisions of the Review Conferences of the convention. China supports measures that help strengthen the effectiveness of the convention. It will actively join in discussions of the Ad Hoc Group on promoting international cooperation, enhancing trust, strengthening verification, and other issues.
    中国在军事装备及其技术转让问题上，尊重世界各国按照《联合国宪章》有关原则拥有维护自身安全的自卫权利，也关切武器装备的过度积累对世界安全和地区稳定产生的不利影响。
 With regard to the transfer of military equipment and related technology, China respects the right of every country to self-defence aimed at safeguarding its own security in accordance with the relevant principles contained in the Charter of the United Nations, but at the same time it is very concerned about the adverse effects on world security and regional stability arising from excessive accumulations of weaponry.
    中国在较长的时间里没有武器装备的出口贸易，直到八十年代初才开始出口，且数量一直十分有限。按照联合国大会决议，中国参加了联合国常规武器转让登记。联合国常规武器转让登记的情况表明，中国的常规武器出口同美、俄、英、法、德等国家相比，数量很小。
For many years until the early 1980s, China did not engage in weapons export trade, and since then the volume of such exports has been limited. In accordance with a resolution by the UN General Assembly, China participates in the United Nations register of conventional arms transfers. As these records make clear, China's exports of conventional weapons are only a small portion of those of the United States, Russia, Britain, France or Germany.
    中国对常规武器转让一贯坚持以下原则：武器出口应有助于接受国的正当防卫能力；不损害有关地区和世界的和平、安全与稳定；不利用军贸干涉主权国家的内政。
China consistently adheres to a series of principles on conventional weapons transfers. The export of such weapons should help the recipient nation increase its appropriate defence capacity. The transfer must not impair peace, safety or stability regionally or globally. China does not use trade in weaponry to interfere in sovereign states' internal affairs.
    中国对武器装备及其技术转让实行严格管制，建立了相应的管理机构和运行机制。国家军品贸易管理委员会是在国务院、中央军委领导下，负责武器装备及其技术转让的统管机构，它的主要职能是制订转让的法规和政策，其成员主要包括外交部、总参谋部、国防科学技术工业委员会和对外贸易经济合作部等有关部门的负责人。国家军品贸易局是国家军品贸易管理委员会的办事机构，负责处理日常事务。
China strictly controls transfers of military equipment and related technologies and has established an appropriate administrative organization and operating mechanism to achieve this goal. The State Administrative Committee on Military Products Trade (SACMPT), under the leadership of the State Council and the Central Military Commission, is responsible for the centralized control of transfers of military equipment and related technologies. Its main function is drafting laws and policies governing such transfers. It is mainly comprised of leading personnel of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Headquarters of the General Staff, the Commission of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defence, MOFTEC and other relevant departments. As the administrative arm of the SACMPT, the State Bureau of Military Products Trade is responsible for handling day-to-day affairs.
    中国对外经营武器装备及其技术转让的部门和公司必须得到政府授权和注册批准，严格按照批准的经营范围从事活动。武器装备及其技术转让合同须经批准才能有效，重大的转让项目、合同必须经国家军品贸易管理委员会审查，国务院、中央军委批准。未经政府审查批准，私自转让武器装备及其技术的公司或个人，将受到严厉的法律制裁。
Governmental departments and companies engaged in transfers of military equipment and technologies must be authorized, registered and approved by the government. Their business activities must remain strictly within the scope of operation approved. Contracts for transfer of military equipment and technologies require approval before gaining effect. Major transfer items and contracts must be examined by the SACMPT and approved by the State Council and the Central Military Commission. Stern legal sanctions shall be taken against any company or individual who transfers military equipment and technologies without proper governmental examination and approval.
    中国在防扩散及军事装备转让方面所坚持奉行的原则和做法，有利于维护世界和平和地区稳定，有助于推动国际军控与裁军沿着健康的方向发展。
The principles and measures to prevent the proliferation of weaponry and unwarranted transfers of military equipment that China has consistently upheld have helped preserve world peace and regional stability and promote the healthy development of international arms control and disarmament.
积极推动国际军备控制与裁军　　
Actively Promoting International Arms Control and Disarmament
    中国一贯认为，争取实现裁军，维护世界和平，需要世界各国的共同努力。长期以来，中国重视并支持国际社会为促进军控与裁军所作的持续努力。自1971年恢复在联合国的合法席位后，中国更加积极地参与国际军控与裁军活动。
China has always held that common effort by all nations is necessary to realize disarmament and safeguard world peace. It has long stressed and supported international community's sustained efforts to promote arms control and disarmament. Since China was restored to its rightful seat in the United Nations in 1971, it has even more actively participated in international arms control and disarmament activities.
    中国以认真的态度参加联合国大会和负责审议裁军与安全问题的第一委员会以及联合国裁军审议委员会会议。中国派高级代表团参加三次联合国专门讨论裁军问题的特别会议，以及“联合国裁军与发展的关系”国际会议。
China conscientiously attends meetings of the United Nations General Assembly, the First Committee which considers issues on disarmament and international security and the Disarmament Commission of the United Nations. It sent highlevel delegations to the three UN special sessions on disarmament issues and to the UN Conference on the Relationship Between Disarmament and Development
    中国重视并支持通过谈判缔结军控与裁军协议和条约。中国自1980年起正式参加日内瓦裁军谈判会议的工作，积极促进各项裁军问题的谈判和达成有关公约。
China stresses and supports the conclusion of arms control and disarmament agreements and treaties through negotiation. Beginning in 1980, it has formally joined in the work of the Geneva Conference on Disarmament and has actively promoted negotiations on a wide variety of disarmament issues and the conclusion of relevant conventions.
    中国赞赏并支持联合国倡导的各项裁军活动。1987年，中国作为东道主同联合国合作在北京召开了“世界裁军运动”区域讨论会。中国响应联合国的号召，就裁军问题进行广泛宣传，在全国范围开展“国际和平年”、“裁军十年”等活动。中国曾多次派人参加由联合国主持的有关研究裁军和安全问题的专家组、讨论会，认真负责地为拟订公正合理的研究报告作出了自己的贡献。
China appreciates and supports disarmament activities proposed by the United Nations. In 1987, China, in cooperation with the United Nations, hosted the Regional Symposium on World Disarmament Campaign in Beijing. In response to United Nations' proposals, China carried out extensive publicity on disarmament issues and implemented a series of nationwide activities including an &quot;International Peace Year&quot; and a &quot;Disarmament Decade.&quot; On many occasions it sent representatives to UN expert group meetings and symposiums on disarmament and international security issues, conscientiously and responsibly making its own contribution to the drafting of fair and rational research reports.
    在国际军控与裁军活动中，中国一贯积极支持广大第三世界国家提出的合理建议和主张。七十年代初，中国支持斯里兰卡等国关于把印度洋定为永久和平区的建议。1973年和1987年，中国分别签署了《拉丁美洲和加勒比禁止核武器条约》的第二号附加议定书和《南太平洋无核区条约》的有关附加议定书。
In international disarmament activities China has consistently given active support to reasonable disarmament proposals and initiatives by the Third World countries. In the early 1970s, China supported the proposal by Sri Lanka and other countries that the Indian Ocean be designated a Zone of Peace. In 1973, China signed the Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco) and in 1987 the relevant protocols of the South Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Rarotonga). 
中国一贯尊重并支持有关国家根据本地区的实际情况，在自行协商、自愿协议的基础上建立无核区的要求。根据这一立场，中国欢迎非洲国家达成《非洲无核区条约》，支持有关国家建立朝鲜半岛、南亚、东南亚和中东等无核区的主张。在双边领域，中国与一些国家定期或不定期进行军备控制与裁军问题的磋商。
China has always respected and supported the demands of the countries concerned for the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of voluntary consultation and agreement and in accordance with actual local circumstances. Given this consistent position, China welcomes the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty agreed upon by the African nations, and supports the proposal by relevant nations on the establishment of nuclear-free zones in the Korean Peninsula, South Asia, Southeast Asia and the Middle East. Correspondingly, China holds bilateral consultations with various nations on arms control and disarmament issues, either on regular or ad hoc basis.
    中国参加了一系列重要的国际军控与裁军条约或公约，主要有：《禁止在战争中使用窒息性、毒性或其他气体和细菌作战方法的议定书》、《禁止或限制使用某些可被认为具有过分伤害力或滥杀滥伤作用的常规武器公约》、《南极条约》、《关于各国探测及使用外层空间包括月球与其他天体活动所应遵守原则的条约》、《禁止细菌(生物)及毒素武器的发展、生产及储存以及销毁这类武器的公约》、《禁止在海床洋底及其底土安置核武器和其他大规模毁灭性武器条约》和《不扩散核武器条约》等。
China has acceded to a series of major international arms control and disarmament treaties and conventions, including the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, the Convention on Prohibition or Restriction on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, the Antarctic Treaty, the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, Including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, the Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Seabed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof, and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. 
中国签署了《关于禁止发展、生产、储存和使用化学武器及销毁此种武器的公约》。中国高度重视这些国际法律文件对促进国际军控与裁军的积极作用，严肃认真地履行自己所承担的义务。中国代表团正在积极参加《全面禁止核试验条约》和《禁止生产核武器用裂变材料公约》的谈判工作。
China is also signatory to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. China attaches great importance to the active role these international legal documents play in promoting international arms control and disarmament and has earnestly and conscientiously fulfilled its own obligations under the agreements. A Chinese delegation is currently actively participating in the negotiation on the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and the Convention on Banning the Production of Fissile Materials for Nuclear Weapons or Other Nuclear Explosive Devices.
    中国不仅以自己的实际行动，而且还以许多现实、合理的主张，积极推动国际军控与裁军进程。
China is actively promoting the international arms control and disarmament process with both real actions on its own part and many realistic and reasonable proposals.
    早在1963年，中国政府就发表声明，主张全面、彻底、干净、坚决地禁止和销毁核武器。中国在发展核武器问题上一贯持十分克制的态度，核武库一直维持在十分有限的水平。中国的核武器始终以自卫为目的，不威胁别国，不参加核军备竞赛，在核试验方面也始终保持克制。
As early as 1963, the Chinese government issued a statement calling for the complete, thorough, utter and resolute prohibition and destruction of nuclear weapons. China has persistently exercised great restraint in the development of nuclear weapons and its nuclear arsenal has been very limited. It has developed nuclear weapons for self-defence, not as a threat to other countries. It has not joined and will not join in the nuclear arms race and has consistently maintained restraint over nuclear testing.
    中国政府历来反对核讹诈和核威慑政策。1964年10月16日，中国政府郑重建议：召开世界各国首脑会议，讨论全面禁止和彻底销毁核武器问题。拥有核武器的国家承担义务，不对无核武器国家使用核武器，不对无核武器区使用核武器，彼此也不使用核武器。中国自拥有核武器第一天起，就庄严承诺在任何时候、任何情况下不首先使用核武器，并无条件不对无核国家和无核区使用或威胁使用核武器。
The Chinese government has from the beginning opposed nuclear blackmail and the nuclear deterrent policy. On October 16, 1964, the Chinese government offered a solemn proposal: a summit conference be held to discuss the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and that nuclear-weapon states commit themselves not to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states and nuclear-weapon-free zones or against each other. From the first day it gained nuclear weapons, China has solemnly undertaken not to be the first to use nuclear weapons at any time and in any circumstance and unconditionally not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones. 
作为一个核武器国家，中国从不回避自己应负的责任，主张核武器国家应承诺不首先使用核武器，曾多次建议核国家谈判缔结互不首先使用核武器的国际条约。1994年1月，中国正式向美、俄、英、法等国提出了《不首先使用核武器条约》草案，并建议五个核国家尽早在北京就此进行首轮磋商。1995年4月5日，中国再次正式声明，重申无条件向所有无核国家提供“消极安全保证”，并承诺向这些国家提供“积极安全保证”。中国的上述主张得到了广大无核国家的支持。
China as a nuclear-weapon state never shies away from its due obligations, advocating that nuclear-weapon states should undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons and repeatedly proposing that nuclear-weapon states negotiate and conclude an international treaty on the no-first-use of nuclear weapons against each other. In January 1994, China formally presented a draft for the Treaty on the No-First-Use of Nuclear Weapons to the United States, Russia, Britain, France and other countries, proposing that the five nuclear-weapon states hold first-round discussions on the treaty in Beijing as soon as possible. On April 5, 1995, China made another official statement, reiterating its unconditional provision of &quot;negative security assurance&quot; to all non-nuclear-weapon states, at the same time undertaking to provide these nations with &quot;positive security assurance.&quot; These positions taken by China have won the support of a great many countries without nuclear weapons.
    在实现消除核武器目标的过程中，中国主张防止核武器扩散。1995年5月，中国在《不扩散核武器条约》审议与延期大会上，支持该条约无限期延长的决定，同时也赞成“核不扩散及裁军原则和目标”、“加强条约审议机制”和“中东无核区”三项决议。中国认为，会议的结果符合所有缔约国的利益，有助于维护世界和平、安全与稳定。中国认为，该条约的无限期延长，再次确认了核裁军、防止核扩散和促进和平利用核能国际合作的各项目标，而不应被理解为核国家可永远拥有核武器。
China advocates prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons as part of the process of eliminating such weapons. In May 1995, at the Conference on the Review and Extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, China supported the decision to indefinitely extend the treaty and the three decisions on the principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, on enhancing the review process of the treaty and on the Middle East Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone. China holds that the results of the conference accord with the interests of all the parties to the treaty and will help maintain world peace, security and stability. China believes that the indefinite extension of this treaty reaffirms the objectives of international cooperation in nuclear disarmament, the prevention of nuclear proliferation and the promotion of the peaceful use of nuclear energy and should not be interpreted as permitting the nuclear-weapon states to retain possession of nuclear weapons forever.
    冷战时期，中国坚决反对美苏两个超级大国的军备竞赛，强调实现裁军的关键在于两个超级大国率先采取实际行动。中国在1978年联合国第一届裁军特别大会上提出：两个超级大国不论是核军备还是常规军备都大大超过其他任何国家，必须率先采取裁军行动。在1982年联合国第二届裁军特别大会上，中国进一步提出具体主张：美苏两国应停止试验、改进和生产核武器，并率先大幅度削减其各种类型的核武器和运载工具。中国所提出的“两超率先”主张得到国际社会的一致赞同，对推动美苏谈判并取得实际裁军进展起到了积极作用。
During the cold war, China resolutely opposed the arms race between the two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, and stressed that the key to success in disarmament laid in the two superpowers taking real action on their own initiative. In 1978 at the First Special Session on Disarmament of the United Nations, China proposed that, as the two superpowers had more nuclear and conventional arms than any other country, they must take the lead in disarmament. In 1982 at the Second Special Session on Disarmament of the United Nations, China went a step further by putting forth a concrete proposal: The United States and the Soviet Union should stotesting, improving and producing nuclear weapons and should take the lead in drastically reducing their stockpiles of all types of nuclear weapons and means of delivery. China's proposal that the &quot;two superpowers take the lead&quot; met with uniform approval from the international community and has played an active role in promoting negotiations between the two nations, creating actual progress towards disarmament.
    为逐步实现无核武器世界的目标，中国在1994年第四十九届联大上进一步提出了一个完整的、相互联系的核裁军进程建议：所有拥有核武器的国家宣布无条件地不首先使用核武器，立即谈判并签署互不首先使用核武器的条约；支持建立无核区的努力，保证不对无核国家和无核区使用或威胁使用核武器；通过谈判争取不迟于1996年缔结一项全面禁止核试验条约；主要核大国如期实施现有核裁军条约并进一步大幅度削减核军备；通过谈判缔结一项禁止生产核武器用的裂变材料公约；签署全面禁止核武器公约；所有拥有核武器的国家承担彻底销毁核武器的义务，并在有效国际监督下付诸实施；在防止核武器扩散和推进核裁军进程的同时，积极推动和平利用核能的国际合作。
In an effort to step by step realize the objective of building a world free from nuclear weapons, in 1994 China put forward a complete, interrelated proposal for the nuclear disarmament process at the 49th Session of the UN General Assembly. All nuclear-weapon states should declare unconditionally that they will not be the first to use nuclear weapons and immediately begin negotiations towards a treaty to this effect; efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones should be supported and guarantees given not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones; a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty be negotiated and concluded no later than 1996; the major nuclear powers should implement existing nuclear disarmament treaties as scheduled and further substantially reduce their nuclear weapon stockpiles; a convention banning production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons be negotiated and concluded; a convention prohibiting all nuclear weapons be signed, whereby all nuclear-weapon states undertake to completely destroy existing stocks of nuclear weapons under effective international supervision; prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons while promoting nuclear disarmament process and international cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
    核裁军与常规裁军一直是裁军领域的两项优先任务。1986年，中国首次在联合国大会上提出关于核裁军和常规裁军的两个裁军提案，指出美苏在核裁军和常规裁军问题上都负有特殊责任。此后，中国连续五年都在联大第一委员会提出上述“两案”，均获协商一致通过。中国此举为推动核裁军和常规裁军在八十年代末、九十年代初取得实际进展发挥了重要作用。
Nuclear disarmament and conventional disarmament have all along been the two priority tasks in the sphere of disarmament. In 1986, China presented two proposals on nuclear and conventional disarmament for the first time at the UN General Assembly, pointing out that the United States and the Soviet Union had special responsibilities both for nuclear and conventional disarmament. Subsequently, for five years China had presented these two proposals to the First Committee of the UN General Assembly, and they had been adopted by consensus. This action on China's part played an important role in generating real progress in nuclear and conventional disarmament in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
    中国反对外空军备竞赛，自1984年起，曾多次在联大提出关于防止外空军备竞赛的决议草案。中国认为，外层空间属于全人类，应完全用于和平目的，任何国家都不应发展任何类型的外空武器，以实现外空“非武器化”。
China opposes the arms race in outer space. Beginning in 1984, it has on numerous occasions proposed to the UN General Assembly draft resolutions on preventing such arms race. China maintains that outer space belongs to all mankind and should be used exclusively for peaceful purposes. No country should develop any kind of weapon to be used in outer space: outer space should be kept &quot;weapon free.&quot;
    近年来，军备透明问题引起各国关注。1991年，中国向联合国裁军审议委员会提交了“关于军事情况的客观情报问题基本立场”的工作文件，全面阐述了军备透明问题的立场：军备透明的目的应是增进各国、各地区及世界的和平、安全和稳定，应遵循各国安全不受减损的基本原则；军备透明的具体措施，应由各国通过平等协商，共同确定，自愿参加。中国的上述原则对促进实施适当、可行的军备透明措施具有积极作用。
In recent years, the issue of transparency in armaments has attracted a great deal of attention in all countries. In 1991, China submitted a working paper to the Disarmament Commission of the United Nations entitled &quot;Basic Positions on Objective Information on Military Matters,&quot; presenting an overview of China's position: Transparency in armaments is aimed at advancing peace, security and stability for every country and region and the entire world; accordingly the fundamental principle that the security of individual states should not be compromised should be upheld. The specific measures for transparency should be decided on through equal consultations by all countries and be implemented on voluntary basis. These principles play an active role in promoting the implementation of proper and feasible transparency measures.
    中国重视区域裁军问题。1991年，中国向联合国裁军审议委员会提交了关于区域裁军的工作文件，提出一整套原则立场：双边、区域和多边裁军应相互促进；创造有利的外部条件和环境对促进区域裁军十分必要，区域外的国家，特别是最大武库国，应对区域裁军努力给予积极的合作和支持；在考虑区域裁军问题时，应承认并尊重各地区的安全环境、军备水平的差异，在措施和步骤方面，不存在对各地区普遍适用的模式。中国的上述立场基本被联合国裁军审议委员会的最后文件所采纳。
China attaches great importance to regional disarmament. In 1991, China submitted a working paper on regional disarmament to the Disarmament Commission of the United Nations containing a complete set of principles and positions. Bilateral, regional and multilateral disarmament should be mutually promoting. The creation of favourable external conditions and environment is absolutely necessary in the promotion of regional disarmament; countries outside the region, particularly those with the largest arsenals, should actively cooperate with and give energetic support to regional disarmament efforts. In considering regional disarmament issues, interregional differences in security environment and level of armament should be acknowledged and respected; in terms of measures to be taken or process to be followed there is no model applicable for all regions. China's position as above was adopted in the main in the Disarmament Commission's final document.
    作为一个亚太地区国家，中国高度重视本地区的安全、稳定、和平与发展。1994年，中国提出亚太安全的三个基本目标：保持本国的稳定与繁荣；维护长期和平稳定的周边环境；在相互尊重和平等基础上开展对话与合作。针对亚太地区的特点，中国主张亚太安全合作应遵循并采取以下原则和措施：以《联合国宪章》与和平共处五项原则为基础，建立互相尊重、友好相处的新型国家关系；以促进经济共同发展为目标，建立平等互利、互相协作的经济关系；以平等协商、和平解决为准则，处理亚太国家之间的争端和纠纷，逐步消除地区不稳定因素；以促进本地区的和平与安全为宗旨，坚持军备只用于防御的原则，不搞任何形式的军备竞赛；以增进了解和信任为目的，促进多种形式的双边或多边安全对话与磋商。中国的立场得到了广大亚太国家的理解和支持。
China is located in the Asian-Pacific region, and understandably is specially concerned with the security, stability, peace and development in this region. In 1994, China presented three basic objectives for the region's security: maintenance of stability and prosperity in China, safeguarding long-term peace and stability in its surrounding environment, and initiating dialogues and cooperation on the basis of mutual respect and equality. In cognizance of the Asian-Pacific region's particular circumstances, China holds that with regard to security and cooperation in the region the following principles and measures to realize them should be followed and adopted: On the basis of the Charter of the United Nations and the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence [mutual respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence], establish a new mutual respect and friendly relationship between nations; with promoting common economic development as the objective, establish economic relations based on equality, mutual benefit and mutual cooperation; settle conflicts and disputes between nations within the region through consultation on the basis of the principle of equality and peaceful resolution, so as to step by step remove the factors of instability in the region; with the promotion of the region's peace and security as the purpose, adhere to the principle of arms only being used in defence and refrain from any form of arms race; and promote various forms of bilateral or multilateral dialogues and consultations on security issue so as to strengthen trust and understanding. China's position has won understanding and support from most of the Asian-Pacific countries.
    中国一贯重视同周边国家的睦邻友好关系，积极推动建立双边信任措施。近年来，中国分别与一些周边国家进行了多层次的磋商，并采取了一系列的实际行动。中国与前苏联签署了《在边境地区相互裁减军事力量和加强军事领域信任的指导原则协定》。中俄首脑联合发表了关于“互不首先使用核武器、互不将各自的战略核武器瞄准对方”的声明。中印缔结了《在边境实际控制线保持和平与安宁的协定》。中国还应乌克兰、哈萨克斯坦的请求，发表了关于中国向两国提供安全保证的声明。
China has consistently stressed friendly, good-neighbourly relations with adjacent countries and has actively promoted measures to establish bilateral trust. In recent years, China has held multi-level consultations with a number of neighbouring countries and has taken a series of practical actions. China and the former Soviet Union signed an Agreement on Principles Governing the Mutual Reduction of Military Forces and the Enhancement of Confidence in the Military Field in the Border Areas. The leading figures of China and Russia issued a joint statement &quot;on no first use of nuclear weapons against each other and on not targeting their respective strategic nuclear weapons at each other.&quot; China and India concluded an Agreement on the Maintenance of Peace and Tranquillity Along the Line of Actual Control in the Border Areas. At the two nations' request, China issued a statement providing security guarantees to Ukraine and Kazakhstan.
结束语　　
Concluding Remarks 
    回顾人类战争与和平的漫长历史，人们深感和平来之不易，应倍加珍惜。
Looking back over mankind's long history of war and peace, one is deeply struck by the fact that peace does not come easily and thus should be doubly treasured.
    近年来，国际局势虽趋缓和，但天下并不太平，地区形势持续紧张，武装冲突和局部战争连绵不断，霸权主义和强权政治依然存在。旧的矛盾还未彻底解决，新的矛盾又在出现，国际军控与裁军任重而道远。因此，彻底消除战争惨祸，实现全面、持久的和平，依然是爱好和平的人们所面临的一项十分复杂和艰巨的任务。
In recent years, while there has been some relaxation in the international situation, peace has not prevailed in the world. On the regional level, tensions persist. Armed conflicts and local wars break out continuously and hegemonism and power politics are still lingering on. While old contradictions have yet to be fundamentally resolved, new contradictions emerge. International arms control and disarmament is still a long-term, arduous task. The complete eradication of the disaster of war and the realization of a complete and lasting peace, therefore, remain a highly complex and difficult task before the peace-loving people of the world.
    世界要和平，国家要发展，社会要进步，已成为不可抗拒的时代潮流。各国人民只有共同努力，坚持走和平与发展的道路，继续推动军控与裁军的进程，并致力于在和平共处五项原则和其他公认的国际关系准则的基础上建立和平、稳定、公正、合理的国际政治经济新秩序，持久和平才有可能，和平与发展的正义才能最终完全战胜战争的邪恶。
The world wants peace, nations want development and society wants progress--this has become the irresistible tide of the day. As long as the peoples of all nations work together, adhering to the road of peace and development, continuing to unflaggingly promote the arms control and disarmament process, and sparing no effort to establish a new peaceful, stable, fair and reasonable international political and economic order on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and other commonly recognized standards for international relations, a long-lasting peace is possible, and the righteousness of peace and development will ultimately and veritably triumph over the evils of war.
    中国将一如既往地与世界各国爱好和平的人民一道，矢志不渝地推动军控与裁军的发展，为把一个和平、稳定、繁荣、美好的新世界带进二十一世纪而不懈努力。
In the future China will unswervingly promote arms control and disarmament as it has in the past, joining together with the peace-loving people of all the nations in the world, working untiringly to bring a peaceful, stable, prosperous and happy new world into the 21st century.
中国人权事业的进展
The Progress of Human Rights in China
中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China 
一九九五年十一月·北京
November 1995, Beijing

目 录
Contents
前 言
Foreword
人民的生存权和发展权
People's Right to Existence and Development
公民、政治权利
Civil and Political Rights
司法中的人权保障
Judicial Work in Safeguarding Human Rights
公民的劳动权和劳动者的权益
The Right to Work of Citizens and the Rights and Interests of Workers
公民的受教育权利
The Right of Citizens to Education
保护妇女、儿童合法权益
Protecting the Legitimate Rights and Interests of Women and Children
少数民族权利的保障
Guarantee of Rights and Interests of Ethnic Minorities
残疾人权益的保障
Guarantee of the Rights and Interests of the Disabled
开展人权研究，普及人权知识
Developing the Study of Human Rights and Popularizing the Knowledge of Human Rights
努力促进国际人权的健康发展
Working Hard to Promote the Healthy Development of International Human Rights Activities

前言　　
Foreword 
    1991年11月，中国政府发表了《中国的人权状况》，向国际社会阐述了中国在人权问题上的基本立场和实践。四年来，中国的人权事业又取得了新的进展。
In November 1991 the Chinese government published the white book Human Rights in China, which made clear to the international community China's basic position and practice on human rights. In the last four years the cause of human rights in China has seen new progress.
    1991年以来的四年，是中国全面实施国民经济和社会发展第八个五年计划的重要历史时期。中国的国民经济和社会发展突飞猛进，原定到2000年国民生产总值比1980年翻两番的计划已于1995年提前完成，人民生活显著改善，正在向小康目标前进。当前，中国政治稳定、经济发展、社会进步、民族团结，人民安居乐业、生活水平不断提高，人权状况呈现全面改善的良好态势。
The four years since 1991 marked an important historical period for the overall implementation of the Eighth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development. National economic and social development in China has advanced by leaps and bounds. The plan to quadruple the 1980 GNP by 2000 was realized ahead of schedule in 1995. The Chinese people's life has improved greatly, and they are working hard to achieve a comfortable life. Today political stability, economic development and social progress are characteristics of China's new social order, along with ethnic unity, domestic harmony and a continually rising standard of living, thereby demonstrating the overall improvement in human rights. 
实践证明，将人民的生存权、发展权摆在首位，在改革、发展、稳定的条件下全面改进人权状况，是符合中国国情和全体人民的根本利益的，也是举世公认的。
Practice has proved that it suits China's conditions and the basic interests of all the Chinese people to give priority to the people's right to existence and development and improve the situation of human rights in an all-round way under circumstances of reform, development and stability. This has won worldwide recognition.
    四年来，中国积极维护《联合国宪章》促进人权和基本自由的宗旨与原则，坚决反对一些国家对其他国家特别是发展中国家在人权方面采取双重标准，或者以自己的模式强加于人，借口“人权问题”干涉他国内政的霸权主义行径。
In the last four years China has actively safeguarded the aim and principle of promoting human rights and basic freedoms set forth in the United Nations Charter and firmly opposed some countries' hegemonic acts of using a double standard for the human rights of other countries, especially developing countries, and imposing their own pattern on others, or interfering in the internal affairs of other countries by using "human rights" as a pretext.
中国在人权问题上的原则立场，得到了世界许多国家的支持，为维护世界和平，促进国际人权事业的健康发展，作出了自己的努力。
China's principled stand on human rights has won support from many countries of the world. China has made effective efforts in maintaining world peace and promoting the healthy development of international human rights.
    虽然这几年中国在促进人权方面取得了显著成绩，但是，受历史和发展水平的限制，中国的人权状况还存在着一些不如人意的地方。继续维护和促进人权，不断地提高全体人民享受人权的水平，仍然是中国人民和政府的一项长期的任务。
Though great achievements have been made in the last four years in promoting the development of human rights in China, some human rights situations are not so satisfactory because of the limitations of history and level of development. It is still a long-term task for the Chinese people and government to safeguard and promote the development of human rights and improve the human rights situation for all the people.
人民的生存权和发展权　　
People's Right to Existence and Development 
    中国是一个拥有12亿人口，人均资源相对贫乏，曾经长期遭受外国侵略、掠夺和压迫的发展中国家。享有生存权和发展权，历史地成为中国人民最迫切的要求。1991年以来，中国政府继续坚定不移地推行以经济建设为中心，在发展经济的基础上不断改善人民生存权和发展权的基本政策，取得了令世人瞩目的成就。
China is a developing country with a population of 1.2 billion and relatively poor per-capita resources. It suffered foreign invasion, exploitation and oppression for a long time. The right to exist and develop thus historically became the urgent demand of the Chinese people. Since 1991, by firmly upholding economic construction as the central task, the Chinese government has pursued the basic policy of continually improving the people's right to existence and development on the basis of economic development. Its achievements in this respect have attracted worldwide attention.
    1991—1994年，中国经济以平均每年递增12.2%的速度发展，远远高于世界经济平均年增长1.9%的速度。中国经济持续、快速、健康的发展，使中国社会总体发展水平全面提高，促进了中国人民生存权和发展权的明显改善。
From 1991 to 1994 China's economy increased at an average annual rate of 12.2 percent, much higher than the world's average annual rate of 1.9 percent. The sustained, quick and healthy growth of China's economy has raised the level of China's overall social development and conspicuously improved the right to existence and development of the Chinese people.
    中国城乡居民收入水平稳定增长。城镇居民家庭人均生活费收入由1990年的1387元增至1994年的3179元，扣除物价上涨因素，实际增长38.3%，平均每年递增8.4%；农村居民家庭人均生活费收入由686元增至1221元，扣除物价上涨因素，实际增长18.2%，平均每年递增4.3%。城乡居民的储蓄存款余额从1990年底的7034亿元增加到1994年底的21519亿元，四年增加2倍多。
The incomes of both rural and urban residents have increased steadily. The per-capita income for living expenses of urban households increased to 3,179 yuan in 1994 from 1,387 yuan in 1990; after deducting the price-rise factor the actual increase was 38.3 percent, an average annual increase rate of 8.4 percent. The per-capita income for living expenses of rural households increased to 1,221 yuan from 686, and after deducting the price-rise factor the actual increase was 18.2 percent, an average annual increase rate of 4.3 percent. The balance of deposits of rural and urban residents increased to 2,151.9 billion yuan at the end of 1994 from 703.4 billion yuan at the end of 1990, a more than three-fold increase in four years.
    中国城镇居民的消费水平总体上已接近小康。1994年，城镇居民的食品支出占消费支出的比重(恩格尔系数)，从1990年的54.2%下降到50.0%。食品构成中，肉、禽、蛋、牛奶的比例大幅度提高。城镇居民购买耐用消费品的数量显著增加，平均每百户居民拥有彩色电视机86台(比1990年增加27台)、黑白电视机30台(比1990年减少22台)、电冰箱62台(比1990年增加20台)。城镇家庭人均居住面积已达到7.8平方米，61.7%的家庭使用煤气或液化气。1994年人均购买服装比1990年增加1.6倍。
China's urban residents are close to living a comfortable life according to their level of consumption. The proportion of food expenses in consumption outlay (the Engel coefficient) dropped to 50.0 percent in 1994 from 54.2 percent in 1990. The proportion of meat, poultry, eggs and milk increased greatly in the food structure. The purchase of durable goods by urban residents showed an obvious increase--86 color TV sets per 100 households (an increase of 27 sets over 1990), 30 black-and-white TV sets per 100 households (22 sets less than 1990), and 62 refrigerators per 100 households (an increase of 20 refrigerators over 1990). The per-capita living area reached 7.8 square meters in urban households and 61.7 percent of the households were using gas. Clothes bought by each person in 1994 increased 2.6 times on the average over 1990.
    中国农村的绝大多数居民解决了温饱问题，而且生活消费结构趋于优化。1994年，农村居民的食品支出占消费支出的比重(恩格尔系数)降为58.8%。农村居民购买耐用消费品的数量迅速增加。1994年，平均每百户农村居民家庭拥有电视机75.3台、收录机26台、洗衣机15台。农村人均住房面积达到20.2平方米。
The majority of rural residents have enough food and clothing and their consumption patterns have tended to optimize. Food expenses dropped to 58.8 percent of the consumption expenditure (the Engel coefficient) in 1994. At the same time, the consumption of durable goods increased greatly in the countryside. The average number of TV sets was 75.3 per 100 households, tape recorders 26, and washing machines 15 in rural areas in 1994; the average per-capita living area was 20.2 square meters in the countryside.
    随着生活质量的提高，中国人口死亡率由1990年的6.67‰下降为1994年的6.49‰，比西方某些发达国家低2个多千分点。
Owing to improvement in the quality of life, the mortality rate of the Chinese people dropped to 6.49 per 1,000 in 1994 from 6.67 per 1,000 in 1990, two or more per thousand points lower than some developed Western countries.
    虽然中国经济快速发展，人民生活水平显著提高，但中国的总体经济发展水平与西方一些发达国家相比还有很大差距。据世界银行1995年9月17日公布的材料，在世界192个国家和地区的财富排名表中，中国居倒数第31位，估计的人均财富只有6600美元。在中国国内，由于自然条件和历史方面的原因，东部沿海地区与中西部地区的经济发展也不平衡。
Though China's economy has developed rapidly and the people's living standard has improved markedly, the overall level of China's economic development still has a long way to go compared with some developed Western countries. According to data issued by the World Bank on September 17, 1995, China was, in terms of wealth, the 31st from the bottom in a list of 192 countries and regions in the world. The estimated average per-capita wealth was only US$ 6,600. There is also unequal economic development between China's eastern coastal areas and its central and western areas because of natural conditions and historical reasons.
    中国发展社会主义经济的基本方针，是兼顾效率与公平，让一部分地区、一部分人先富起来，同时鼓励“先富帮后富、先富带后富”，最终实现全体人民的共同富裕。因此，中国政府一直重视帮助中西部地区发展经济、提高生活水平，积极扶助贫困人口尽快摆脱贫困。
China's basic principle for developing a socialist economy is that consideration be given to both efficiency and fairness. While some areas and some people become rich first, they are encouraged to help poor areas and people get rich, so that all the people in the country will ultimately become rich and prosperous. Therefore, the Chinese government has always attached great importance to helping the central and western areas develop their economy, raise the living standard of the people, and actively help the poor people get rid of poverty.
    1991年以来，为解决贫困人口的温饱问题，中国政府和人民作了不懈努力。到1994年底，又有1500万人摆脱贫困。全国贫困人口由1990年底的8500万人下降到7000万人，贫困人口占全国农村总人口的比重由10.1%下降到8.2%。现在仍然贫困的地区，这几年的生产生活条件和基础设施也有明显改善。
Since 1991 the Chinese government and people have exerted unremitting effort to solve the problem of food and clothing for poor people. By the end of 1994 another 15 million people were lifted out of poverty, reducing the number of poor people from 85 million in 1990 to 70 million, and the proportion of poor people in the rural population was reduced from 10.1 percent to 8.2 percent. In the last few years, production and the living conditions and infrastructure in the still poor areas have improved greatly.
    为了支持扶贫工作，1991—1994年，中央政府投入贫困地区的专项扶贫资金累计达305.8亿元。国家帮助贫困地区建设水、电、路等基础设施，改善生态环境和基本的生产、生活条件，建设旱涝保收、稳产高产基本农田。据统计，1994年国家重点扶持的592个贫困县，新增基本农田996万亩，新增经济园林1371万亩，解决了718万人的饮水困难，新修公路20285公里，新架输变电线路32596公里，新建小学2166所、卫生院617处。社会各界、各人民团体都以各自的方式积极参与了扶贫工作。
In order to support the work of aiding the poor, the Central Government allocated a total of 30.58 billion yuan from 1991 to 1994 to help poor areas. The state helped poor areas build an infrastructure of water, electricity and roads, improve the ecological environment and basic production and living conditions, and build stable and high-yield farmland despite drought or excessive rain. Statistics show that in 1994, 9.96 million mu of farmland and 13.71 million mu of cash crop land had been added in 592 poor counties where major help had been provided. At the same time, drinking water for 7.18 million people had been provided, 20,285 kilometers of highway had been built, 32,596 kilometers of new transmission lines had been installed, and 2,166 primary schools and 617 clinics had been built in these counties. Various circles and people's organizations in China have played an active part in aiding the poor in different ways.
    尽管如此，中国的扶贫工作仍然任重而道远。目前还没有解决温饱问题的7000万人，多数居住在中西部的深山区、喀斯特地貌区、荒漠区、高寒山区、黄土高原区，以及地方病高发区。其中有500多万人只能异地脱贫。帮助他们摆脱贫困需要付出更大的努力，今后的扶贫工作更艰巨。为此，1994年3月，中国政府制定了扶贫攻坚计划，决定从1994年起，集中人力、物力、财力，动员社会各界力量，力争在本世纪末基本解决这7000万人的温饱问题，使他们的人权状况得到根本改善。
Even so, the work of aiding the poor in China is still a long-term and arduous task. At present, 70 million people do not have enough food and clothing. Most of them are living deep in the mountains, in karst, desolate, high and cold areas, and in loess plateau regions in central and western China, and in areas where endemic diseases rage. To get rid of poverty, more than 5 million of them have to move to other places. More must be done to help these people get away from poverty. More arduous tasks confront us. To tackle this question, the Chinese government drew up a plan in March 1994 and decided from that year to concentrate manpower and material and financial resources and to mobilize people from various circles in the society to solve the food and clothing problems for the 70 million people by the end of this century, thereby improving their basic human rights.
    目前，中国正在制定国民经济和社会发展“九五”计划和2010年远景目标，计划到2000年，在中国人口将比1980年增长3亿左右的情况下，实现人均国民生产总值比1980年翻两番；基本消除贫困现象，人民生活达到小康水平。到2010年，实现国民生产总值比2000年翻一番，使人民的小康生活更加富裕。“九五”计划和2010年远景目标的实施，将使中国人民的生存权和发展权在更高的层次和更广阔的领域得到实现。
At present, China is drawing up the Ninth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development and a longrange objective for 2010. It plans to quadruple the 1980 per capita GNP and ensure that people have enough food and clothing and live a comparatively comfortable life by 2000, even though China's population will by then have increased by about 300 million over that of 1980. By 2010 the GNP will have doubled that of 2000 and the people will be well off. Implementation of the Ninth Five-Year Plan and the 2010 long-range objective will enable the Chinese people to realize their right to existence and development on a higher level and broader scope than before.
公民、政治权利
 Civil and Political Rights 　
    在高度重视人民的生存权和发展权的同时，中国重视保障人民依法享有各项公民、政治权利，实行和发展社会主义民主政治。这是中国经济得以迅速发展的重要原因。
While paying great attention to the people's right to existence and development, China has also laid stress on ensuring that its citizens enjoy various civil and political rights according to law and that socialist democratic politics be practised and developed. That is an important reason why China's economy has developed rapidly.
    中国的一切权力属于人民。这是中国国家制度的核心内容和根本准则，是社会主义民主政治的实质。人民行使国家权力的机关是全国人民代表大会和地方各级人民代表大会。
All power in China belongs to the people. This is the nucleus and basic principle of China's state system and also the essence of socialist democracy in China. The National People's Congress and people's congresses at various levels are the organs whereby the people exercise state power.
    中国各级人民代表大会现有代表365万名，都是民主选举产生的。中国宪法规定，年满18周岁的公民，不分民族、种族、性别、职业、家庭出身、宗教信仰、教育程度、财产状况、居住期限，都有选举权和被选举权，但依法被剥夺政治权利的人除外。根据中国的国情，县、乡两级人民代表大会的代表由选民直接选举，全国人民代表大会代表和省、自治区、直辖市的人民代表大会代表由下一级的人民代表大会选举产生。1993年底，全国2897个县(不设区的市、市辖区)和48172个乡、民族乡、镇都依法进行了换届选举。据统计，全国有选举权和被选举权的人占18周岁以上公民人数的99.97%，参加选民登记的人数占18周岁以上人口的99.3%。中国的选举不受金钱的左右，由选民自由地讨论、协商，推举出他们信任的候选人，然后进行无记名投票，实行差额选举。因此，选民政治热情很高，全国的参选率达到93.58%。
Deputies to people's congresses at various levels total 3.65 million and are all democratically elected. China's Constitution stipulates that all citizens of the People's Republic of China who have reached the age of 18 have the right to vote and stand for election, regardless of nationality, race, sex, occupation, family background, religious belief, education, property status, or length of residence, except persons deprived of their political rights according to law. In line with China's conditions, deputies to the people's congresses of counties and townships are elected directly by the people, and deputies to the NPC and people's congresses of provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the Central Government are elected by people's congresses at a lower level. By the end of 1993, elections for the new session had taken place in accordance with the law in 2,897 counties (including cities without districts and districts directly under the cities) and 48,172 townships, ethnic-group townships and towns. According to statistics, people having the right to vote and to stand for election accounted for 99.97 percent of the number of citizens 18 years old or above, and the number of registered voters accounted for 99.3 percent of the total population aged 18 or above. Elections in China are not controlled by money, and candidates trusted by the people are elected after free consultation and discussion and by secret ballot. Multicandidate elections are practised in China. Voters showed high political enthusiasm and the voting rate reached 93.58 percent throughout the country.
    全国人民代表大会和地方各级人民代表大会的代表都是对国家和社会有贡献、为人民服务表现突出的各族各界人士，他们具有广泛性。1993年产生的第八届全国人民代表大会代表共2978名，其中，工人占11.15%，农民占9.4%，知识分子占21.8%，民主党派和无党派人士占19.21%。代表总数中，妇女占21.03%，少数民族占14.7%，全国56个民族都有自己的代表。
Deputies to the National People's Congress and people's congresses at various levels are persons who have made contributions to the state and society or have served the people in an outstanding way. As they come from various ethnic groups and circles in the country, they are representatives of the broad masses of people. Of the 2,978 deputies elected in 1993 to the Eighth National People's Congress, 11.15 percent were workers, 9.4 percent peasants, 21.8 percent intellectuals, and 19.21 percent personages from democratic parties and non-party personages. Women accounted for 21.03 percent of the total deputies, and ethnic minority deputies accounted for 14.7 percent. Thus, all 56 ethnic groups in the country have their own representatives.
    人大代表代表各行各业各阶层的广大人民参加行使国家权力，对人民负责，受人民监督。选民或选举单位有权罢免自己选出的代表。任何公民或单位对违法乱纪或者严重失职的代表都可以提出罢免的要求。这和西方一些国家选举产生的议员不受人民群众监督，选民无权罢免是截然不同的。1995年2月，全国人大常委会修改了《全国人民代表大会和地方各级人民代表大会选举法》和《地方各级人民代表大会和人民政府组织法》，进一步完善了人民代表选举制度和罢免制度。这是保障人民和人大代表切实行使民主权利，当家作主，管理国家的重要保证。
Deputies to the people's congresses, representing people of every profession and social stratum, exercise state power and are responsible to the people and supervised by the people. Voters or electoral units have the right to recall their deputies. Any citizen or unit may demand the recall of deputies who break the law, violate discipline or seriously neglect their duty. This is totally different from some Western countries, where elected parliament members are not supervised by the people and voters do not have the right to recall them. In February 1995 the NPC Standing Committee amended the Electoral Law for National People's Congress and People's Congresses at Local Levels and the Organic Law of the Local People's Congresses and Local People's Governments, thereby further perfecting the electoral and recall systems for people's deputies. This is an important guarantee for the people and deputies to the people's congresses to earnestly exercise democratic power, be masters of the country and run the state.
    作为国家最高权力机关，全国人民代表大会决定国家的大政方针，制定国家基本法律，选举产生国家行政机关、审判机关和检察机关并对它们实行监督。全国人民代表大会每年举行一次会议，听取和审议国务院、最高人民法院、最高人民检察院的工作报告，审查和批准国民经济和社会发展计划，以及每年的财政预算。全国人大常委会每两个月举行一次会议，监督宪法的实施，制定和修改法律，听取和审议各部门工作报告，决定任免国家工作人员。八届全国人大已举行了三次年度会议，大会对国家发展方针、政策和规划的决定，以及通过的重要法律，体现了全国人民的意志和利益，从而调动了广大人民的积极性，使国民经济和社会发展得以持续跃进。
As the supreme organ of state power, the National People's Congress has the power to make decisions on state policies and principles, enact basic statutes and elect and supervise state administrative, judicial and procuratorial organs. The National People's Congress meets once a year to listen to and examine the work reports submitted by the State Council, the Supreme People's Court and the Supreme People's Procuratorate and to examine and approve plans for the national economy and social development as well as the yearly state budget. The Standing Committee of the National People's Congress meets once every two months, supervises the enforcement of the Constitution, enacts and amends statutes, listens to and examines the work reports from various departments, and appoints and removes state functionaries. Three yearly sessions of the Eighth NPC have been held, and the state principles, policies and plans decided and statutes adopted by the sessions have embodied the people's will and interests, thus arousing their enthusiasm and ensuring the sustained fast development of the national economy and social progress.
    各级人大及人大常委会注意保障代表的权利，对人大代表在大会上正式提出的建议和意见，各级国家机关和有关部门都须在法律规定的时限内，将处理情况直接向代表作出答复。1994年第八届全国人民代表大会第二次会议期间，代表们提出了2401件建议和意见，其中代表建议所提问题已经解决或基本解决的占17.9%，代表建议所提问题正在解决或列入规划的占48.2%。人民代表大会还接受人民的来信和来访，直接听取人民的意见和要求。1995年八届全国人大第三次会议期间，共收到人民来信41630件，接待来访202人次。大会秘书处接受和办理人民来信来访，督促有关部门和地方解决群众急需解决的问题，纠正冤假错案，维护了人民的权益，并密切了国家机关同人民群众的联系。
People's congresses at various levels and their standing committees have paid great attention to ensuring the rights of the deputies. State organs and relevant departments at various levels have to make direct replies within a prescribed time to the deputies with regard to their opinions and suggestions formally put forward at the sessions. During the Second Session of the Eighth National People's Congress, held in 1994, 2,401 suggestions and opinions were put forward, and about 17.9 percent of the problems raised by the deputies have been solved completely or basically, and 48.2 percent are being solved or under consideration. The National People's Congress hears opinions and receives demands directly from visiting people or through letters. During the Third Session of the Eighth National People's Congress, held in 1995, 41,630 letters from the masses and 202 visitors were received. The NPC Secretariat handled the letters and received the visitors, and urged relevant departments and local governments to solve urgent problems, and address cases in which people had been wronged, misjudged or framed. Thus the rights and interests of the people have been safeguarded and close relations have been established between the people and state organs.
    中国共产党领导的多党合作和政治协商制度，是体现人民当家作主的中国人民民主制度的重要组成部分。政治协商会议是由各党派、人民团体和无党派爱国人士组成的具有广泛代表性的统一战线组织。目前，中国各级政协有委员48万名，其中，全国政协委员2099名。在八届全国政协中，有共产党的委员839名，占39.97%；各民主党派的委员共642名，占30.59%；无党派的委员618名，占29.44%。妇女委员293名，占13.96%，少数民族委员243名，占11.58%。社会各界都有人担任全国政协委员。他们中有经验丰富的政治活动家、成就卓著的专家学者和各方面的著名人士。他们以自己的经验、学识和影响，代表各界参加政协组织，参与国家事务和社会事务，参与国家各项重大决策的协商讨论和民主监督。他们提出的许多意见和建议，受到中共中央和国务院的重视和采纳。八届全国政协通过调查研究提出了许多重大建议。特别是《关于加强宏观调控抑制通货膨胀的建议》为国务院采纳后，对国家采取有效措施，加强宏观调控，保证国民经济持续、快速、健康发展起了积极作用。
Multi-party cooperation and political consultation under the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party is an important component of China's people's democratic system with the people as masters of the country. The Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference is a united front organization, made up of delegates from the Communist Party and the democratic parties and personages from non-party and mass organizations. At present, China has 480,000 members of political consultative conferences at various levels, among whom 2,099 are CPPCC National Committee members. Among the Eighth CPPCC National Committee members, 839 are Communist Party members, accounting for 39.97 percent, 642 are members of democratic parties, accounting for 30.59 percent, and 618 are non-party democrats, accounting for 29.44 percent. There are 293 women members, accounting for 13.96 percent, and 243 members are from ethnic groups, accounting for 11.58 percent. The CPPCC members come from all walks of life, including experienced political activists, well-known figures from various walks of life, and experts and scholars in various fields. Using their rich experience, knowledge and influence, they join CPPCC organizations on behalf of various circles, take part in state and social affairs, and participate in the consultation, discussion and democratic supervision of important state decisions. The CPC Central Committee and the State Council set great store by the opinions and suggestions made by these members and many of these have been accepted. After investigation and research they made many important proposals during the Eighth CPPCC National Conference. In particular, the Suggestions on Strengthening Macro Regulation and Bringing Down Anflation, which was accepted by the State Council, has played an active part in strengthening macro-regulation with effective measures and ensuring the sustained, rapid and healthy development of the national economy.
    全国政协八届一次、二次会议，委员共提出提案4032件，内容涉及国家的大政方针以及人民群众的生活等各个方面，已办复3940件，办复率达97%以上。
During the first and second sessions of the Eighth CPPCC National Conference, 4,032 proposals were offered on state policies and principles and people's life; 3,940, or more than 97 percent, of the problems have been settled.
    在中国，有八个民主党派，它们不是在野党，而是参政党。共产党同各民主党派长期共存，互相监督，肝胆相照，荣辱与共。中共中央的重要主张、国务院的重大决策，事先都与各民主党派协商，征求意见。许多民主党派人士担任了国家权力机关、行政机关、司法机关的领导职务。现任国家副主席、19名全国人大常委会副委员长中的8名副委员长，都是民主党派人士。1994年，各民主党派共提出28项重大建议，这些建议受到中共中央和国务院的高度重视，有的已被采纳，有的正在研究。
There are eight democratic parties in China. They are not parties in power, but they participate in government and political affairs. The Chinese Communist Party upholds the principle of long-term coexistence, mutual supervision, sincere treatment with each other and the sharing of weal or woe in its relations with China's other democratic parties. Consultations and exchanges of views precede important decisions made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. Many members of the democratic parties hold leading posts in state organs, administrative and judicial departments. The present vice-president of the state and eight out of the nineteen vice-chairmen of the NPC Standing Committee are members of democratic parties. In 1994 the democratic parties submitted 28 important proposals which received the close attention of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. Some of the proposals were accepted and others are under consideration.
    近几年，中国基层民主建设成果显著。到1994年底，全国城市已建立10多万个居民委员会；农村通过村民无记名投票选举产生了100多万个村民委员会。城市和农村居民居住地区设立的居民委员会和村民委员会，是基层群众性自治组织，办理本居住地区的公共事务和公益事业，调解民间纠纷，协助维护社会治安，并向人民政府反映群众的意见、要求和提出建议。全国有半数以上村委会建立了村民代表会议制度，做到了村中重大事情由村民代表讨论决定。广大城乡人民按照民主原则组织起来，自我管理，自我教育，自我服务，实行直接民主。这是中国社会主义民主政治制度的重要进展。
In recent years China's democratic construction at the grass-roots level has achieved remarkable results. By the end of 1994 more than 100,000 urban neighborhood committees had been set up, and more than one million village committees had been elected by secret ballot in the countryside. These urban neighborhood committees and village committees are grass-roots mass self-government organizations. They handle public affairs and public welfare, mediate disputes among people, help safeguard the social order and transmit opinions, demands and suggestions to the people's governments. A system of village meetings, where important things are decided by the villagers, has been set up in half the village committees. The masses of urban and rural people are organized in line with democratic principles, and they practise self-management, self-education, self-service and direct democracy. This is an important progress in China's socialist democratic political system.
    1990年10月1日起施行的《行政诉讼法》，是保障公民权利的一部重要法律。该法规定：“公民、法人或其他组织认为行政机关和行政机关工作人员的具体行政行为侵犯其合法权益，有权依照本法向人民法院提起诉讼。”人民把《行政诉讼法》称为“民告官的法律”。
The Administrative Procedural Law, put into effect on October 1, 1990, is an important law ensuring people's civil rights. It stipulates that citizens, legal persons, and other organizations may start legal proceedings against administrative organs and their staff when their legal rights and interests are infringed upon by specific administrative actions of these organs and persons. People consider the Administrative Procedural Law as a "law for people to lodge a complaint against officials."
    为保证《行政诉讼法》的施行，国务院发出了《关于贯彻实施〈行政诉讼法〉的通知》，要求国务院所属各部门、地方各级人民政府主动配合人民法院开展工作，严格执法。国务院还发布了《行政复议条例》，作为贯彻实施《行政诉讼法》的配套法规。许多行政机关举办了《行政诉讼法》学习班。
To ensure implementation of the Administrative Procedural Law, the State Council issued a Notice on Implementing the Administrative Procedural Law and required that all departments under the State Council and local people's governments at different levels actively cooperate with people's courts to strictly enforce laws. The State Council also promulgated the Administrative Reconsideration Regulations as a complementary law and regulations for the implementation of the Administrative Procedural Law. Study classes for the Administrative Procedural Law have been organized by many administrative organs.
    根据《行政诉讼法》规定，中国建立了社会团体支持公民起诉和诉权保障的制度。社会团体可受委托成为诉讼代理人，公民可以借助社会团体的力量行使诉权。
In accordance with the stipulations of this law, the system of social organizations supporting citizens to file suit and ensuring that citizens can lodge appeals have been established. The social organizations are legal representatives when they are entrusted, and citizens can exercise their right to lodge appeals with the support of the social organizations.
    为给公民起诉提供方便，最高人民法院规定，如果当事人确有经济困难，诉讼费可以缓交、减交或免交。
For the convenience of citizens, the Supreme People's Court has stipulated that if litigants have financial difficulties, their litigation costs may be paid later or partially, or be exempted.
    据统计，自1990年1月至1994年12月，地方各级人民法院共受理一审、二审和审判监督行政案件167882件，涉及治安、土地规划等40多个行政管理领域。这些案件中，涉及公民基本权利的占大多数，相当一部分涉及公民的人身权、财产权。原告中有农民、工人和知识分子，被告中有县、市政府部门和中央国家机关。自《行政诉讼法》实施以来，三分之二的诉讼都以行政机关改变原决定而终结。
According to statistics, from January 1990 to December 1994 people's courts at various levels accepted 167,882 cases, including first and second trials as well as trials and supervision of administrative cases, involving more than 40 administrative realms, such as public security and the reallocation of land. The majority of these cases were related to basic civil rights and some of them involved rights of the person and property rights. Among the plaintiffs were peasants, workers, and intellectuals, and the defendants included departments of county and city governments and central and state organs. Since the implementation of the Administrative Procedural Law two-thirds of the cases have ended in a change of the original decision made by the administrative organs.
    为使广大公民了解法律，懂得通过法律保护自己的合法权益，增强法制观念，有关部门运用电视、广播、报刊、文艺演出、知识竞赛、专家咨询等形式，在全体公民中开展了法制宣传活动。
In order to help the citizens understand the law, gain knowledge of how to protect their legal rights and interests through legal procedure, and strengthen their concept of the legal system, various kinds of activities, such as performances, knowledge competitions and consultations by specialists, have been organized by relevant departments through TV, radio, newspapers and magazines.
    1994年5月，中国制定了《国家赔偿法》。该法规定，国家机关及其工作人员如在行使职权中侵犯公民合法权益造成损害的，受害人有权依法取得国家赔偿。目前，全国中级以上人民法院已成立赔偿委员会，受理赔偿案件。
In May 1994 the State Compensation Law was worked out. This law stipulates that if the legal rights and interests of citizens are infringed upon by state organs and their staff in exercising their functions and powers, the aggrieved persons have the right to get state compensation in accordance with the law. At present, compensation committees have been established in the intermediate people's courts and above, and they have started to accept compensation cases.
    宪法规定的公民言论、出版、集会、结社、游行、示威的自由得到维护和保障。新闻出版事业的发展，为公民行使言论、出版自由提供良好的条件。1995年，中国的报纸由1990年的1444种增至2202种；杂志由5751种增至8135种。中国的广播电台由1990年的635座增至1995年的1210座，电视台由509座增至980座，有线电视台已发展到1200座，卫星地面接收站发展到54084座，电视机的社会拥有量达到2.5亿台。电视的人口覆盖率1990年为79.4%，现在已扩展到88.3%。中国的出版社，1994年发展到514家，比1990年增加11%；出版各类图书103836种，比1990年增加29.4%。这几年，中国各种新闻传播媒介更加重视联系群众、面向实际生活，发挥舆论监督作用。人民通过新闻传播媒介自由地发表意见，提出批评建议，讨论国家和社会的各种问题。报刊上的许多专栏和电台、电视台的许多节目深受人民欢迎。各种社会团体也有很大增加。
Freedom of speech, of the press, assembly, association, marching and demonstration is guaranteed. The development of the press and publishing has provided favorable conditions for ensuring citizens' freedom of speech and the press. Newspapers have increased in number, from 1,444 in 1990 to 2,202 in 1995 in China, and magazines have increased to 8,135 from 5,751. At the same time, radio stations have increased to 1,210 in 1995 from 635 in 1990, and TV stations to 980 from 509. At present, the number of cable TV stations has reached 1,200 and there are 54,084 ground satellite stations. People own 250 million TV sets and the population covered by television has risen to 88.3 percent today from 79.4 percent in 1990. Publishing houses increased to 514 in 1994 in China, an increase of 11 percent over 1990, and 103,836 book titles were published, an increase of 29.4 percent over 1990. China's media have over the years maintained close ties with the people and are geared to practical life, bringing their supervisory function into play. Through the media, the people freely express their opinions, put forward criticisms and suggestions, and discuss all kinds of questions related to the state and society. Many newspaper columns and radio and television programs are greatly welcomed by the people. The number of social organizations has also increased. 
截止到1995年4月的统计，已经登记成立的全国性社会团体有1737个，比1990年增加44.7%；各地民政部门登记成立的县以上社会团体达20万个，比1990年增加11.1%。这些社团都依据宪法和法律独立自主地开展活动。中国最大的三个社会团体是中华全国妇女联合会、中华全国青年联合会和中华全国总工会。这三个社团的分支机构遍布全国，联系和团结全国的妇女、青年、职工，参与国家和地方的政治生活，协调社会公共事务，维护妇女、青年、职工的合法权益，发挥了很大作用，在中国社会上有很高的声望。
By the end of April 1995, statistics showed that 1,737 national social organizations had been registered and established, an increase of 44.7 percent over 1990, and 200,000 social organizations at and above the county level, registered in departments of civil affairs, had been set up, an increase of 11.1 percent over 1990. These organizations decide on their own activities within the limits permitted by the Constitution and law. The All-China Federation of Trade Unions, All-China Women's Federation and All-China Youth Federation are the three largest mass organizations with branches all over the country. They keep close contact with and unite women, youth and workers and staff, participate in state and local political activities, coordinate social and public affairs and safeguard the legal rights and interests of women, youth and workers and staff. They play a great role and enjoy high social prestige in China.
    宗教信仰自由在中国得到法律保障。中国各种宗教都依照宪法和法律规定的权利，开展正常的活动。佛教和道教在中国传播比较广泛，信教人数没有统计。现在，全国共有佛教寺庙9500余处，僧人约17万人；道教的住庙道士、道姑6000余人，开放的宫观600余座。伊斯兰教教民约1700万人，清真寺26000余座；天主教徒近400万人，有神职人员2700人，教堂4000余座；基督教徒约650万人，有教牧传道人员18000余人，教堂8000余座，简易活动场所(聚会点)20000余处。宗教社会团体有2000多个，宗教院校48所。各宗教都自己出版经典、书刊。
Freedom of religious belief in China is guaranteed by law. Normal activities of different religions can be carried out in China according to their rights prescribed by the Constitution and law. Buddhism and Taoism are comparatively widespread in China, but statistics of the number of their devotees are not available. There are now over 9,500 Buddhist temples and monasteries with about 170,000 monks and nuns in the country. There are over 6,000 Taoist priests and nuns who live in the temples, with more than 600 temples and monasteries open to the public. There are about 17 million Muslims and more than 26,000 mosques, about 4 million Catholics, including 2,700 clergymen, and 4,000 Catholic churches, about 6.5 million Christians or Protestants, including 18,000 missionaries, 8,000 churches and 20,000 simply equipped meeting places in China. China now has 2,000 religious social organizations and 48 religious schools and colleges. Religious scriptures, books and magazines are published by various religions. 
中国宪法规定，国家保护正常的宗教活动；同时规定，任何人不得利用宗教进行破坏社会秩序、损害公民身体健康、妨碍国家教育制度的活动。宗教团体和宗教事务不受外国势力的支配，这是为了维护中国公民真正享有宗教信仰自由的权利。
China's Constitution stipulates that the state protects normal religious activities. No one may make use of religion to engage in activities that disrupt public order, impair the health of citizens or interfere with the educational system of the state. In order to ensure that citizens really enjoy the freedom of religious belief, religious bodies and religious affairs are not subject to any foreign domination.
司法中的人权保障　　
 Judicial Work in Safeguarding Human Rights
    近几年，中国颁布和实施《警察法》、《检察官法》、《法官法》和《监狱法》等一系列法律，并采取了其他许多措施，进一步加强司法中的人权保障。
In recent years China has promulgated and put into effect the Police Law, the Public Procurators Law, the Judges Law, the Prison Law and a series of other laws. In addition, many other measures have been taken to further strengthen judicial work in safeguarding human rights.
    “人民警察为人民”，是中国老百姓的流行语。
"People's police work for the people." This is a popular saying among the Chinese people. 
为使人民警察保障人权的行为更加规范化，中国1995年2月颁布实施的《警察法》规定，警察必须严格执法，切实保障人民群众的安全，遇到公民人身、财产安全受到侵害时应立即进行救助；严禁警察非法剥夺、限制公民的人身自由；警察执行职务要接受社会和公民的监督；公民对警察的违法违纪行为有权向有关部门检举、控告。实践结果是，警民关系更加密切，有关部门收到的控告警察的信件比过去更少，表扬信比过去更多。中国警察现有862752名，仅占总人口的7.4／万，低于西方一些主要国家20／万以上的比例。
In order to standardize the conduct of the people's police in safeguarding human rights, China promulgated and implemented the Police Law in February 1995. It stipulates that the police enforce the law strictly to effectively safeguard the security of the people and give timely help and assistance to citizens whose personal safety and that of their property are infringed upon; it strictly forbids the police to unlawfully deprive citizens of or curtail their freedom of person; the police, while performing their duties, must accept the supervision of society and its citizens; citizens have the right to report to the department concerned and bring a charge against police who have acted against the law and discipline. As a result of implementing the law, relations between the police and the people have become closer and the departments concerned have received fewer accusatory letters and more commendatory letters. China today has 862,752 police, accounting for 7.4 persons per 10,000 of the total population, much lower than the figure of 20 persons per 10,000 in some major Western countries.
    《检察官法》、《法官法》是1995年2月颁布并于同年7月起开始施行的。这两项法律中分别规定，检察官、法官有权依法独立行使检察权、审判权，不受任何行政机关、社会团体和个人干涉；在司法活动中，必须以事实为依据，以法律为准绳，秉公办案，廉洁公正。这些原则过去早有规定，现在进一步规范化、具体化，并得到更严格的执行。法院和检察院的执法水平又有明显提高。
The Public Procurators Law and the Judges Law were promulgated in February 1995 and went into force in July of the same year. These two laws stipulate that public procurators and judges have the right, according to law, to independently exercise procuratorial power and judicial authority without interference from any administrative organs, social communities and individuals; they must base themselves on fact, take law as the criterion, handle a case impartially and be honest in performing their official duties in all judicial activities. These principles, set in the past, are now further standardized, specified and implemented more strictly. The law-enforcement level of the court and procuratorate has been raised remarkably.
    这几年，中国的律师队伍发展迅速，加强了司法中的人权保障。到1994年底，全国律师人数已达83619人，比1990年增加近一倍，超过了在1995年发展到75000人的预期。全国律师事务所已达6419个，比1993年增加25%。外国的一些律师事务所也被允许在中国设立了代办处或办事处。当前，中国律师正积极着手开展法律援助工作，北京等地设立了法律援助基金，上海、广州还成立了法律援助中心，为公民解答法律问题，提供法律服务。
The rapid development of the ranks of Chinese lawyers in recent years has reinforced the judicial guarantee of human rights. By the end of 1994 there were 83,619 lawyers in the country, almost double the 1990 figure and exceeding the target of 75,000 planned for 1995. There are now 6,419 law offices, an increase of 25 percent over the figure for 1993. Some foreign law firms have been allowed to set up agencies or offices in China. Presently Chinese lawyers are busy providing society with legal assistance. Legal assistance funds have been established in Beijing and other places, and legal assistance centers have been set up in Shanghai and Guangzhou to answer questions concerning the law from citizens and provide them with other legal services.
    中国是犯罪率比较低的国家。1994底，中国监狱的在押犯总数为128.6万人，占全国人口的10.7／万，比西方某些发达国家(56.5／万)低得多。
China is a country with a relatively low crime rate. At the end of 1994 China's prisons had a total of 1.286 million prisoners, or 10.7 persons per 10,000 of China's total population, which is much lower than the figure of 56.5 persons per 10,000 in some Western developed countries.
    中国的刑法对罪与非罪有明确的界定。只有触犯了国家法律，才被绳之以法。中国的刑法中有反革命罪，是指危害国家安全、图谋颠覆国家政权罪，即其主观上具有推翻国家政权的目的，客观上有危害国家安全的行为。仅仅持有不同的政治观点而没有危害国家安全的行为，不构成犯罪。
China's criminal law has set clear demarcations between crime and non-crime. Only those who have violated state law are dealt with according to law. Included in China's criminal law are crimes of counterrevolution, which refer to crimes that endanger state security and aim at overthrowing the political power of the country, namely, acts with the subjective goal of overthrowing the political power of the country and acts that objectively endanger state security. Those who hold differing political views, but have committed no act endangering state security, have committed no crime.
    中国的监狱对罪犯实行惩罚与改造相结合、教育与劳动相结合的原则，宗旨是将罪犯改造成为守法公民。改造的手段主要是教育，包括法制教育、道德教育、文化教育、技术教育，同时组织罪犯参加力所能及的劳动。
Following the principle of combining punishment with reform and education with labor, Chinese prisons aim at reforming criminals and turning them into law-abiding citizens. The chief means to achieve this goal is education, including education in law, ethics, culture and technology. Meanwhile, prisoners are organized to participate in whatever labor they are capable of.
    中国对罪犯未被剥夺或限制的那部分权利依法予以保障。1994年12月，中国颁布并开始实施《监狱法》。这部法律共78条，其中涉及保障罪犯权利的有20多条。总则第七条明确规定：“罪犯的人格不受侮辱，其人身安全、合法财产和辩护、申诉、控告、检举以及其他未被依法剥夺或者限制的权利不受侵犯。”《监狱法》还具体规定了罪犯有不受体罚虐待权、申诉权、通信权、会见亲属权、接受教育权、休息权、获得劳动报酬权、获得劳动保护和劳动保险权、医疗权以及刑满释放后享受与其他公民平等待遇的权利，等等。为了切实保障罪犯的正当权利，《监狱法》对监狱的人民警察提出了严格、具体的要求，第十四条还列举了监狱人民警察在执行监狱管理公务中必须禁止的各种违法行为。通过规范监狱人民警察的执法行为，使罪犯的正当权利避免受到侵犯。
China protects, according to law, those rights of the prisoners that have not been taken away or curtailed. In December 1994 China promulgated and put into force the Prison Law, 20 of whose 78 articles are related to the protection of prisoners' rights. Article 7 in the General Provisions states clearly: "Prisoners have the right of immunity from insult to their dignity and from infringement on their personal security and legal property; they have the right of defense and the right of appeal, complaint and accusation as well as other rights that have not been taken away or curtailed by law." The Prison Law also stipulates specifically that prisoners have the right of immunity from corporal punishment and abuses, the right of appeal, the right of communication, the right of meeting visiting family members and relatives, the right to education, the right to rest, the right to receive remuneration for work, the right to labor protection and labor insurance, and the right to receive medical treatment; they enjoy equal rights with other citizens upon their release after completing their sentence term. In order to safeguard the proper rights of prisoners, the Prison Law sets strict and concrete demands on prison police. Article 14 lists all the offenses against the law that are prohibited while prison police perform their duties. Standardization of the conduct of prison police prevents infringement on the proper rights of prisoners.
    在司法工作的各个环节中，中国反对逼供信，严格禁止酷刑，这方面有一系列的立法。中国于1988年正式加入了《禁止酷刑和其他残忍、不人道或有辱人格的待遇或处罚公约》。中国检察机关对监狱和看守所派驻了专门的机构和人员，检查和监督有无使用酷刑或其他虐待被监管人员的行为，一经发现，立即严肃查处。1994年，全国检察机关立案侦查的刑讯逼供案有409件，已侦查终结398件，违法的公安干警和其他有关人员受到惩处，包括死刑。
China opposes the practice of forcing confessions and giving credence to them and strictly prohibits the use of cruel punishment in every link of the judicial work; it has adopted a series of laws in this regard. In 1988 China formally acceded to the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Chinese procuratorial organs have set up special offices and stationed special personnel in prisons and detention houses to inspect and supervise as to whether prisoners are subject to cruel punishment or other abuses. Once such a case is found, it is investigated and seriously dealt with. In 1994 Chinese procuratorial organs placed 409 cases of extortion of confession on file for investigation and prosecution, and completed the investigation of 398 cases. Public security officers, police and other people involved were punished, including meting out the death sentence.
    中国改造罪犯的工作成效显著。1994年，在监狱所办的学校里获得文化技术方面的毕业、结业证书的有21万多人。全年获得减刑、假释的罪犯达到28.2万多人，占押犯总数的21.96%。1994年，全国重新犯罪率保持在6%—8%，这在世界各国中是很低的。西方一些国家的重新犯罪率在20%—30%，有的高达50%以上。
China has achieved remarkable results in reforming criminals. In 1994 over 210,000 prisoners received graduation and completion of study certificates in culture and techniques from the special schools run by prisons. In the same year 282,000 prisoners were granted reduction of sentence terms and release on provisional parole, accounting for 21.96 percent of the total prisoners. In 1994 the national reconviction rate remained between 6 and 8 percent, a very low rate compared to that of other countries in the world. The reconviction rate in some Western countries stands between 20 and 30 percent, and sometimes as high as over 50 percent.
公民的劳动权和劳动者的权益　　
 The Right to Work of Citizens and the Rights and Interests of Workers
    中国历来重视公民劳动权和劳动者权益的保障，并以此作为维护人权的重要内容。1994年7月，八届全国人大常委会通过了《中华人民共和国劳动法》，对宪法赋予劳动者的基本权利作了全面、具体的规定。劳动者依法享有平等就业、选择职业、取得劳动报酬、休息休假、获得劳动安全卫生保护、接受职业技能培训、享受社会保险和福利以及法律规定的其他权利。《劳动法》规定，国家实行最低工资保障制度和带薪年休假制度，并规定了工时标准、劳动安全卫生标准、女职工特殊保护标准、职业培训标准。
China has always attached importance to the protection of the right of citizens to work and the rights and interests of workers, regarding this as an important aspect of its efforts to safeguard human rights. The Labor Law of the People's Republic of China, adopted in July 1994 by the Standing Committee of the Eighth National People's Congress, fully and concretely states the basic rights of laborers granted by the Constitution. According to law, workers enjoy equal rights to employment, selection of profession, remuneration, rest and vacation, labor security and health protection, professional skill training, social insurance and welfare as well as other rights prescribed by law. The Labor Law stipulates that the state implement a minimum wage guarantee system and a paid annual vacation system, in addition to standards for work hours, labor security and health, with special protection for women workers, and standards for professional training.
    《劳动法》颁布时，规定“劳动者每日工作时间不超过8小时，平均每周工作时间不超过44小时”。1995年3月，国务院颁发通知，在全国实行每周五天工作制，把职工工作时间缩短为每周40小时。在中国这样的发展中国家，这是维护劳动者权益的一个很了不起的举措。
When the Labor Law was promulgated, it stipulated that work hours not exceed eight hours a day or 44 hours a week on the average. In March 1995 the State Council issued a circular adopting the five-day work week nationwide, thus shortening the working hours of workers and staff to 40 hours a week. This is an amazing step taken by a developing country like China in protecting the rights and interests of laborers
    为贯彻实施《劳动法》，全国各地已基本建立劳动合同制度、最低工资保障制度和劳动监察制度。到1995年8月，已正式发布实施本地区最低工资标准的省、自治区、直辖市达到28个。各级政府加强了对劳动者劳动过程中的劳动安全、卫生保护等方面的监查工作，重视对私营企业和外商投资企业的执法监督和检查，及时查处违反《劳动法》规定、侵害劳动者合法权益的企业和个人。
In order to implement the Labor Law, a labor contract system, a minimum-wage system and a labor supervision system have basically been established in the whole country. By August 1995 28 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the central government had officially adopted minimum-wage standards for their respective localities. Governments at all levels have strengthened supervision of labor security and health protection during work, attached great importance to the supervision and examination of implementation of the law in private enterprises and enterprises with foreign investment, and conducted timely investigation and dealt with enterprises and individuals who have violated the stipulations of the Labor Law and encroached upon the legal rights and interests of workers.
    就业是公民享有劳动权的直接体现。这几年，在社会各界的支持下，全国就业工作取得显著成绩。1991—1994年，全国城镇共安置劳动力2921万人。1994年城乡从业人员人数比1991年增加4730万人，城镇失业率保持在2.8%以下。这对于有12亿人口、经济发展水平还很低的中国来说，也是相当不容易的。
Employment is the direct embodiment of the citizens' right to work. With the support of people from all walks of life, remarkable results have been achieved in employment in the whole country over the past few years. From 1991 to 1994 arrangements were made for more than 29.21 million people to find jobs in China's cities and towns. The number of urban and rural employees in 1994 showed an increase of 47.3 million over the 1991 figure, with the unemployment rate in cities and towns remaining below 2.8 percent. This is no easy task for China, a country with a population of 1.2 billion and a still very low level of economic development.
    由于中国人口基数大，劳动力供大于求的矛盾将在一个很长时期内存在。1994年底，中国城镇失业人员有480万人。为解决失业问题，政府推出并实施了“再就业工程”，重点帮助失业6个月以上的求职人员尽快实现再就业。目前，“再就业工程”已在全国范围内推行，并在上海、沈阳等城市取得了显著成效。
Because of China's big population base, the contradiction of the supply of labor force exceeding the demand will exist for a very long time to come. By the end of 1994 China had 4.8 million unemployed in cities and towns. To solve this problem, the government has proposed and carried out the "reemployment project," with the emphasis on helping those who have been unemployed for more than six months to find jobs as soon as possible. At present, this project has been promoted throughout the country, and remarkable results have been achieved in Shanghai, Shenyang and other cities.
    到1994年底，全国共有职业介绍机构2.5万所，仅1994年就有1329万人次通过职业介绍机构实现了就业或再就业。职业技能开发工作有了新的进展，技工学校有4433所，就业培训中心有2600多所。中国已建立起以职业介绍、就业训练、劳动服务企业生产自救为支柱的就业服务体系。
By the end of 1994 China had 25,000 employment agencies, which successfully dealt with 13.29 million person-times in helping people find employment or re-employment in 1994 alone. Professional skill training has developed, with 4,433 schools for training technicians and 2,600 employment training centers set up. China has already established an employment service system, with employment agencies, employment training, labor service, and enterprises based on the principle of save-oneself-by-production as its mainstay.
    1991年以来，中国社会保险事业也取得了显著成就。1995年3月，国务院颁布《关于深化企业职工养老保险制度改革的通知》，建立了社会统筹与个人账户相结合的基本养老保险模式，进一步扩大了养老保险的实施范围，同时确定了基本养老金定期调整的机制，以保障企业离退休人员的基本生活。近几年，国务院几次发布文件，提高离退休人员的离退休金。1994年底，中国有离休、退休、退职人员2929万人，他们领取的离休、退休、退职金，人均相当于在职职工平均工资的82%。在失业保险制度方面，1993年国务院颁布了《国有企业职工待业保险规定》，目前全国已有26个省、自治区、直辖市扩大了失业保险的实施范围。截止到1994年底，全国参加失业保险的职工总数达9500万人。医疗保险制度本着确保全体城镇劳动者都能获得基本医疗，同时节约医疗开支、减轻企业负担的原则进行了改革。另外，工伤保险制度、生育保险制度等，也都朝着进一步保障劳动者权益的方向进行了改革。
China's social insurance has also achieved outstanding results since 1991. In March 1995 the State Council issued the Circular Concerning the Deepening of Reform of the Endowment Insurance System for Workers and Staff of Enterprises. A basic form of endowment insurance that combines social overall planning with personal accounts has been established, thus further expanding the scale of endowment insurance. At the same time a mechanism has been adopted to adjust the basic pension regularly, so as to guarantee the basic livelihood of retirees from enterprises. In recent years the State Council has issued several documents to raise the retirement pay of retirees. By the end of 1994 China had altogether 29.29 million retirees, whose retirement pay and retirement allowances averaged 82 percent of the average wage of workers and staff on the job. With regard to the unemployment insurance system, the State Council promulgated in 1993 the Insurance Regulations for Workers and Staff of State-Owned Enterprises Waiting for Employment. In China today 26 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the central government have extended the coverage of the unemployment insurance program. By the end of 1994, the total number of workers and staff participating in the unemployment insurance program had reached 95 million throughout the country. Based on the principle of ensuring basic medical care for all laborers in cities and towns on the one hand, and economizing on medical expenses and lightening the burden of enterprises on the other, reform has been carried out in the medical insurance system. Reform measures have also been enacted in the system of insurance against injury at work and birth insurance system so as to better protect the rights and interests of the workers.
    由于中国经济不断发展，以及政府重视对劳动者权益的保障，近年来，职工年平均工资逐年增长。1990年，职工年平均工资为2140元，1994年上升到4538元，扣除物价上涨因素后，职工实际工资平均每年增长6.4%。
With the continuous growth of the national economy and the special attention of the government to protecting the rights and interests of workers, the average annual wage of workers and staff has increased year after year, from the average yearly wage of 2,140 yuan in 1990 to 4,538 yuan in 1994, an average annual increase of 6.4 percent in real wage after deducting price-rise factors.
    1991年以来，中国政府加强了对老年人权益的社会保障。现在，全国有28个省、自治区、直辖市政府制定了维护老年人合法权益的地方性法规。1994年底，国家计委、民政部、全国老龄委等10个部门联合下发了《中国老龄工作七年发展纲要》，对保障老年人的各项权益作了全面具体的规定。
Since 1991 the Chinese government has further consolidated the social guarantee for the rights and interests of the elderly. Today the governments of 28 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the central government have enacted local regulations to safeguard the legal rights and interests of the aged. At the end of 1994 ten departments, including the State Planning Commission, the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the China National Committee on Aging, Jointly issued the Seven-Year Development Program for China's Old-Age Work, which comprehensively prescribes detailed stipulations for protecting the rights and interests of the elderly.
    在农村，中国几千年的传统是“养儿防老”。新中国成立后，对于无儿女、无依靠的老人实行“五保供养”(保吃、保穿、保住、保医、保葬)制度，并在许多地方建立了“敬老院”。从1991年开始，民政部着手进行农村养老保险的试点工作，目前全国已有1500个县(市)开展了农村养老保险，参加养老保险的农村人口近5000万人。今后，中国农村老人的生活将有儿女赡养、社会保险、“五保”供养三重保障。
It has been a tradition for several thousand years in China's rural areas to "raise children to provide for old age." After New China was founded, a five-guarantee system was adopted for childless and helpless old folks, according to which they are provided with food, clothing, medical care, housing and burial expenses. In addition, many places have set up "houses of respect for the aged." Since 1991 the Ministry of Civil Affairs has been carrying out the work of rural endowment insurance on an experimental basis. Today, 1,500 counties (cities) have implemented old-age insurance in the rural areas and nearly 50 million people in the countryside have joined the endowment insurance program. In future the life of old people in China's rural areas will be triple-guaranteed by the support of their children, social insurance and the five-guarantee program.
    1994年，国务院制定《农村五保供养工作条例》，使“五保供养”制度化。中国正在建立集体供养、国家救济、兴办敬老院相结合的“五保”供养保障体系。全国已有33584个乡镇对“五保户”实行统筹供养，占全国乡镇的69%。全国集体统筹供养的“五保”人口已达273万人，占落实供养人口的76.68%。全国农村敬老院有近4万所，56万老年人在院内安度晚年。
The Regulations for Rural Five-Guarantee Work, adopted by the State Council in 1994, enables the five-guarantee program to become a system. China is now in the process of establishing a five-guarantee system by combining collective support, state relief and the construction of homes of respect for the aged. Presently, 33,584 townships and towns in China have made overall plans for the five-guarantee work, accounting for 69 percent of China's total townships and towns. The number of old people on the five-guarantee programs supported by collectives has reached 2.73 million, accounting for 76.68 percent of the total number actually provided for. China's rural areas have about 40,000 homes of respect for the aged, housing altogether 560,000 old people.
公民的受教育权利　　
 The Right of Citizens to Education
    中国提出了科教兴国的方针，利用有限的经济资源，尽力使公民的受教育权不断得到提高，现已初步形成了一个教育结构基本合理，科类比较齐全，基础教育、职业教育、成人教育、高等教育相互沟通、协调发展的教育体系。1994年，全国共有小学68.3万所，在校学生12820万人，比1990年增加4.7%；普通中学8.2万所，在校学生4981.7万人，比1990年增加8.6%；普通高等学校1080所，在校学生279.9万人，比1990年增加35.7%；成人高等学校1172所，在校学生235.2万人，比1990年增加41.1%；各级各类中等职业学校1.87万所，在校学生912.5万人，比1990年增加39.8%。
China has put forward the principle of invigorating the nation by relying on science and education, making the best use of its limited financial resources to provide Chinese citizens as much as possible with a steadily increased right to education. An educational system based on a basically rational structure and with a quite complete range of subjects has initially taken shape. Under this system, basic education, vocational education, adult education and higher education are interconnected and developing in a coordinated way. By 1994 the country had altogether 683,000 primary schools with 128.2 million pupils, an increase of 4.7 percent over the 1990 figure; 82,000 regular middle schools with 49.817 million students, an 8.6 percent increase over the 1990 figure; 1,080 universities and colleges with 2.799 million students, a 35.7 percent increase over the 1990 figure; 1,172 schools of higher learning for adults with 2.352 million students, an increase of 41.1 percent over the 1990 figure; 18,700 secondary vocational schools of various grades and types with 9.125 million students, a 39.8 percent increase over the 1990 figure.
    为了更好地保障公民受教育的权利，近几年，中国制定并实施了《义务教育法》、《扫除文盲工作条例》、《残疾人教育条例》等教育法规。1995年3月，全国人民代表大会通过了《中华人民共和国教育法》，对公民受教育权的保障作了全面的规定，重申了“公民不分民族、种族、性别、职业、财产状况、宗教信仰等，依法享有平等的受教育机会”的基本原则，规定了国家帮助各少数民族地区发展教育事业、扶持边远贫困地区发展教育事业、扶持和发展残疾人教育事业的原则。
To better protect citizens' right to receiving an education, China in recent years has formulated and put into effect the Law on Compulsory Education, Regulations for the Work of Eliminating Illiteracy, Regulations of Education for the Disabled and other educational regulations. In March 1995 the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress adopted the Law of Education of the People's Republic of China. It prescribes in a comprehensive way citizens' right to education and restates the basic principle that "all citizens enjoy an equal right to education according to law, regardless of ethnic status, race, sex, occupation, property status and religious belief." It also stipulates that the state will help develop education in areas inhabited by China's ethnic minorities, assist remote border regions and poor areas to develop education, and support and develop education for the disabled.
    中国政府一直重视发展基础教育事业。改革开放以来，这一事业发展较快。到1994年底，中国已在90%以上人口的地区普及了小学五年或六年教育，小学学龄儿童入学率为98.7%，比1990年增加0.9个百分点；小学毕业生升入初中的为86.6%，比1990年增加12个百分点。大中城市和部分经济发达地区已经基本普及了九年义务教育。
The Chinese government has always attached great importance to the development of basic education, which has developed at a comparatively rapid pace since the beginning of China's reform and opening to the outside world. By the end of 1994 China had popularized five-year or six-year primary school education in areas inhabited by over 90 percent of its population. The primary school enrollment rate among children of school age reached 98.7 percent in 1994, an increase of 0.9 percentage point over the 1990 figure, and 86.6 percent of primary school graduates entered junior middle schools, an increase of 12 percentage points over the 1990 figure. Nine-year compulsory education has basically been popularized in large and medium-sized cities and some economically developed regions.
    为了保障不同性别、不同民族以及不同经济发展地区的公民能够享受到平等的受教育权利，1990年以来，中国政府采取了强有力的措施，使公民在受教育方面的差距不断缩小。据国家教委统计，全国女童与男童入学率之差，1991年为2.9个百分点，1994年降至1.3个百分点；农村与城市儿童入学率之差，1990年为2.5个百分点，1994年降至0.9个百分点；广西、新疆、内蒙古、西藏、宁夏五个少数民族自治区及青海、云南、贵州三个少数民族较多的省，儿童平均入学率与全国平均入学率之差，1990年为2.5个百分点，1994年降至1个百分点。
In order to ensure that all citizens enjoy an equal right to education, regardless of sex, ethnic status and the economic conditions of their respective regions, the Chinese government has since 1990 adopted effective measures to steadily narrow the gap between them in receiving an education. According to the statistics of the State Education Commission, the difference in the enrollment rate between girls and boys dropped from 2.9 percentage points in 1991 to 1.3 percentage points in 1994; the difference in the enrollment rate between rural children and city children dropped from 2.5 percentage points in 1990 to 0.9 percentage point in 1994. With regard to the five ethnic minority autonomous regions of Guangxi, Xinjiang, Inner Mongolia, Tibet and Ningxia and the three provinces of Qinghai, Yunnan and Guizhou which have a comparatively large number of ethnic minorities, the difference in the average enrollment rate between their children and children of the country as a whole dropped from 2.5 percentage points in 1990 to 1 percentage point in 1994.
    由于经济发展不平衡及其他历史原因，中国长期存在着大量文盲。据统计，在中华人民共和国成立的1949年，全国的文盲总数为3.2亿，文盲率高达80%。1949年以后，中国政府大力开展扫除文盲活动，为广大文盲提供各种形式的免费扫盲教育，中国的文盲总数和文盲率大幅度下降。到1990年，中国15周岁以上人口中的文盲人数降为1.8亿，文盲率降为22.2%。到1994年，中国的文盲人数已下降到1.5亿，文盲率下降为17%；青壮年文盲从6000多万人下降到3500万人。北京、天津、上海和吉林、黑龙江、辽宁、广东等省已基本扫除青壮年文盲。目前，中国政府正采取各种措施，争取到本世纪末，在全国基本普及九年义务教育，基本扫除青壮年文盲。
Owing to the uneven development of the economy and other historical reasons, China has long had a large number of illiterates. According to statistics, illiterates totalled 320 million in 1949 when the People's Republic of China was founded, with the illiteracy rate as high as 80 percent. Since then, the Chinese government has been making great efforts to carry out activities for the elimination of illiteracy, providing illiterates with all kinds of free literacy education. As a result, the total number of illiterates and the illiteracy rate have dropped greatly. By 1990 the number of illiterates among people above the age of 15 came down to 180 million, and the illiteracy rate dropped to 22.2 percent. In 1994 the number of China's total illiterates dropped to 150 million, and the illiteracy rate dropped to 17 percent; the number of young and middle-aged illiterates decreased from 60 million to 35 million, Beijing, Tianjin and Shanghai and the provinces of Jilin, Heilongjiang, Liaoning and Guangdong have basically wiped out illiteracy among young and middle-aged people. Currently the Chinese government is taking all possible measures to basically popularize nine-year compulsory education throughout the country and eliminate illiteracy among young and middle-aged people by the end of this century.
    中国政府十分注意扶持贫困地区发展教育事业。1991年，中国政府设立了教育扶贫款项，每年从国家财政中拨付专项教育扶贫款2亿元，同时还从中央直属企业缴纳的教育费附加中拿出3000万至4000万元，专门用于发展贫困地区的教育事业。另外，还向12个省(自治区)的225个县(旗)投入世界银行贷款2亿美元，用于支持这些地区发展九年义务教育。为弥补国家教育经费的不足，中国政府动员和组织社会力量参与扶贫教育事业。这项事业被称为“希望工程”。到1994年底，已筹集捐赠3.5亿元，设立了救助贫困地区失学少年基金，共资助修建了749所“希望小学”，资助了100多万名因家庭贫困而失学的儿童继续其学业。中国“希望工程”的成功实施，受到了国内外各界人士的好评。
The Chinese government has paid great attention to assisting poor areas to develop education. In 1991 the Chinese government established a help-the-poor education foundation, allocating every year since then 200 million yuan from state finances specially for the development of education in poor areas. In addition, 30 to 40 million yuan in education fees paid by enterprises directly under the central government are used exclusively for educational development in poor areas. Also devoted to the development of the nine-year compulsory education in 225 counties (banners) of 12 provinces (autonomous regions) are loans to the tune of US$ 200 million from the World Bank. To make up for the insufficiency in state educational appropriations, the Chinese government has called on and organized the whole society to give support to the poor areas in developing their education; this endeavor is generally called the Hope Project. By the end of 1994 donations amounting to 350 million yuan had been collected, a back-to-school fund had been established for children in poor areas who had discontinued schooling, 749 Hope Primary Schools had been set up, and over one million children who had been forced to leave school because their families were too poor to support them had resumed their education. The success of China's Hope Project has won extensive praise from people in all circles both at home and abroad.
    近几年，中国政府在推行大学生招生收费制度的同时，采取各种措施资助经济困难的大学生。仅1994年，政府就拨出专款2.17亿元，用于帮助经济困难的大学生接受高等教育。
Over the past few years, while introducing a university admission charge system, the Chinese government has also taken various measures to provide university students from poor families with financial aid. In 1994 alone the government allocated 217 million yuan to be used exclusively for helping students with financial difficulties receive a higher education.
    为帮助贫困地区的农民提高科学文化素质，文化部于1993年设立了文化扶贫委员会。开展了为2万个村各建一个小型图书馆、向每座图书馆赠书100种的“万村书库工程”，并为贫困地区建起了近百座卫星电视接收转播站。
In order to help peasants in poor areas raise their scientific and cultural level, the Ministry of Culture in 1993 set up a cultural help-the-poor committee, which has initiated a Libraries for Villages Project. Since then 20,000 villages have been helped to build their own little libraries, with books of at least 100 types for each. The committee has also built about 100 satellite television receiving and rebroadcasting stations in the poor areas.
保护妇女、儿童合法权益　　
 Protecting the Legitimate Rights and Interests of Women and Children 
    促进男女平等，是中国社会发展的一项基本目标。1991年以来，中国依据男女权利平等和保护妇女特殊权益的立法原则，加强了妇女人权的法律保障。1992年，中国颁布实施了《中华人民共和国妇女权益保障法》，对保障妇女政治、文化教育、劳动、财产、人身和婚姻家庭等各方面的权益作出了具体的规定。目前，中国已形成了以宪法为基础，以《妇女权益保障法》为主体的一整套保障妇女权益的法律体系，其中包括10余部基本法律、40余项国家行政法规，以及80余项地方性法规。
To promote equality between men and women is a basic objective in China's social development. Since 1991, based on the legislative principle of equal rights for men and women and protection of women's special rights and interests, China has worked to reinforce the lawful protection of women's human rights. In 1992 China promulgated and put into effect the Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of Women's Rights and Interests. It stipulates in concrete terms all aspects of women's rights and interests, including rights and interests in politics, culture and education, labor, property, person, marriage and family. China has now established a legal system with the Constitution as its basis and the Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of Women's Rights and Interests as its main part; it includes some 10 legislations, more than 40 administrative laws and regulations and over 80 local laws and regulations guaranteeing women's rights and interests.
    1995年8月，中国政府还颁布了《中国妇女发展纲要》(1995—2000年)，确定中国妇女发展的总目标为：提高妇女的整体素质，使法律赋予妇女的各项权益进一步得到落实。《纲要》还制定了各项具体目标和相应的政策措施。
In August 1995 the Chinese government issued the Program for Chinese Women's Development (1995-2000), which makes clear that the main goal for Chinese women's development is to raise the quality of women in general and make sure that women enjoy all the rights they are entitled to by law. The program also lays down specific goals and related policies and measures.
    中国妇女享有与男子平等的政治权利。近几年，妇女参与管理国家和社会事务的程度进一步提高。在1993年基层人民代表选举中，妇女的参选率高达95%。第八届全国人民代表大会有女代表626人，占代表总数的21.03%，女代表所占比例居世界前列。全国人大常委会有女常委19人，占常委总数的12.3%，比上届提高2个百分点。地方各级人大代表中的女性比例都比上届有所提高。政府各部门中女性担任领导职务的人数也有增加。全国女公职人员已由1991年的1004万人增加到1994年的1237.1万人；公职人员中女性所占比例由31.2%增加到32.5%。1994年，在政府高级领导职务中，国务院有女国务委员1人，正副女部长16人；全国有女副省长18人，正副女市长300多人。中国有女法官21012名。
Chinese women enjoy the same political rights as men. The extent of women's involvement in the management of state and social affairs has further increased in recent years. In 1993, 95 percent of women cast their votes during local elections for people's congresses. There are 626 women deputies to the Eighth National People's Congress, accounting for 21.03 percent of the total number of deputies. The ratio is high in the world. There are 19 women on the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, accounting for 12.3 percent of all Standing Committee members and a 2 percentage point rise from the last congress. The ratio of women deputies in local people's congresses is higher than the last congress. The number of women holding leading positions in government departments has also risen. The number of women employed by the government has risen from 10.04 million in 1991 to 12.371 million in 1994. The ratio of women employed by the government has risen from 31.2 percent to 32.5 percent. In 1994, among those occupying high government positions were one woman State Councillor of the State Council, 16 women ministers or vice-ministers, 18 women provincial vice-governors, more than 300 women mayors or vice-mayors and 21,012 women judges.
    中国妇女的经济、社会、文化权利进一步得到保障。目前中国妇女从业人员已占社会总从业人员的44%，高于世界平均水平(34.5%)。中国城镇女职工人数已由1990年的5294万人增加到1994年的5645.8万人，占职工总数的比例达到38%。农村妇女劳动力约占农村劳动力总数的一半。妇女的就业层次逐步提高。据1993年统计，全国企事业单位专业技术人员中，女性的比例为36.8%。女科技人员达809.7万人，占全国科技人员总数的35%，高于许多发达国家的同类比例。
Chinese women's economic, social and cultural rights are being more effectively guaranteed. The number of women employed now accounts for 44 percent of the employed, higher than the world average of 34.5 percent. The number of women working in cities and towns has risen from 52.94 million in 1990 to 56.458 million in 1994. The ratio of women in the whole work force is 38 percent. About half the labor force in the countryside is made up by women. More and more women are taking more sophisticated jobs. According to statistics for 1993, 36.8 percent of all professional and technical personnel working in enterprises and institutions were women. About 35 percent, or 8.097 million, of China's scientists and technicians are women. This ratio is higher than that in many developed countries.
    中国法律规定，男女同工同酬，妇女劳动受到特殊保护，妇女在经期、孕期、产期和哺乳期受到特殊照顾，职工中的生育妇女享有3个月的带薪产假。几十年来，这些法律规定得到严格遵守。近几年，有些单位的女职工实际享有半年的带薪产假。
Chinese law stipulates that men and women doing the same job get the same pay, and working women receive special protection. Women receive special care during menstruation, pregnancy, maternity and breast-feeding. Working women who give birth are entitled to three months of maternity leave with pay. These laws have been strictly enforced for the past decades. In recent years women employees in some units have been given six months' paid maternity leave.
    妇女的受教育权进一步得到保障。1994年，全国7—11周岁的女童入学率已由1990年的80%提高到97.7%；中学生、大学生中的女性比例分别由1990年的42.2%、33.7%上升到44.3%、34.5%。
Women's right to education is further protected. The ratio of girls between seven and 11 attending school has risen from 80 percent in 1990 to 97.7 percent in 1994. The ratio of female students in middle school and in university rose from 42.2 and 33.7 percent to 44.3 and 34.5 percent respectively.
    国家特别重视保护妇女的婚姻、家庭权利，依法维护妇女的婚姻自主权，维护家庭中的夫妻平等和男女平等。中国妇女享有与男子同等的财产所有权和继承权，平等参与家庭事务管理和决策的权利。据调查，在中国城乡，由夫妻共同决定家庭重大事务的家庭占58%以上。妻子受丈夫虐待、儿媳受公婆虐待的现象已为社会所不容，一些西方国家中严重存在的家庭暴力在中国较少出现。
The state pays special attention to protecting women's rights in marriage and the family and guaranteeing according to law women's independence in marriage and equal rights between husband and wife, men and women in the family. Chinese women enjoy the same right of ownership of property and inheritance as men and equal rights in the management and decision-making of family affairs. According to a survey, in 58 percent of families in China, decisions concerning important family affairs are made by the husband and wife together. A wife abused by her husband or a daughter-in-law abused by her father- or mother-in-law is considered unacceptable offenses in society. The family violence common in some Western countries is relatively rare in China.
    国家尊重妇女的生育权，保护妇女的生育健康。在中国，妇女有计划生育子女的权利，也有不生育的自由；有关部门有义务为育龄夫妇提供安全、有效的避孕药具和技术，保障实施节育手术的妇女的安全和健康。近年来，随着经济的发展和社会的进步，妇女的生育自主权进一步得到保障，因不育或生育女婴而被公婆歧视、被丈夫遗弃的现象越来越少。
The state respects a woman's right to give birth and protects her health when giving birth. In China women have the right to family planning and the freedom to choose not to give birth. Relevant departments have the duty to provide couples at the child-bearing age with safe and effective contraceptives and techniques and ensure that women taking birthcontrol measures are safe and healthy. In recent years, as the economy has developed and society progressed, more and more women are making their own decisions about giving birth. Cases of women being discriminated against by their fathers- or mothers-in-law or estranged by their husbands because they are infertile or give birth to girls have declined steadily.
    中国依照宪法实行的计划生育政策，既体现了国家和社会发展的长远利益，也符合妇女提高健康和家庭生活水平的需要，因而得到了广大妇女的积极拥护和响应。1994年，全国已婚妇女的避孕率已由1990年的75%左右提高到83%，有的地区高达90%以上。中国人口出生率1990年为21.06‰，1994年下降为17.7‰；人口自然增长率由14.39‰下降为11.21‰；妇女总和生育率由2.31下降到2.0左右。与此同时，妇女的生育健康水平显著提高。目前，城市98%和农村70%的孕产妇都能得到产前检查。孕产妇死亡率已由1989年的94.7／10万下降到1993年的67.3／10万。
The family planning policy implemented by the state according to the Constitution represents the long-term interests of state and social development. It also meets the demands of women to raise the level of their health and family life. Women all over China have fully supported this policy. The birthcontrol rate of married women rose from 75 percent in 1990 to 83 percent in 1994, and in some areas it was above 90 percent. The birthrate dropped from 21.06 per 1,000 in 1990 to 17.7 per 1,000 in 1994. The natural population growth rate dropped from 14.39 per 1,000 to 11.21 per 1,000. Women's total birth-rate dropped from 2.31 to about 2.0. At the same time, the health level of women giving birth has risen considerably. Around 98 percent of urban women and 70 percent of rural women have prenatal examinations. The death rate of pregnant women or women giving birth dropped from 94.7 per 100,000 in 1989 to 67.3 per 100,000 in 1993.
    中国的计划生育是对世界人权事业的重大贡献。根据联合国人口基金的统计，目前世界人口已达到57亿，如不加以控制，到2050年将达到119亿，世界将面临“人口爆炸”危机。中国实行计划生育，使中国的“12亿人口日”推迟了9年。
China's family planning policy is a great contribution to the world's human rights. According to statistics issued by the UN's population foundation, the present world population is 5.7 billion. Without exercising control, it will reach 11.9 billion by the year 2050. The world will face the crisis of "population explosion." The family planning policy enabled China to postpone its "1.2 billion day" for nine years.
    儿童是国家和社会的未来。近几年，国家通过立法、司法、行政和其他措施，使儿童的总体状况有了较大的改善。
Children are the future of the country and society. In recent years, through legislative, judicial, administrative and other types of measures, the state has greatly improved children's conditions.
    1991年9月，全国人大常委会通过了《中华人民共和国未成年人保护法》，明确规定“国家保障未成年人的人身、财产和其他合法权益不受侵犯”，并规定了保护未成年人的各项工作原则以及家庭、学校、社会和司法机关在保护未成年人方面的职责，从而使保护少年儿童的工作走上了法制化的轨道。1992年，国务院颁布了《九十年代中国儿童发展规划纲要》，具体规定了本世纪内中国儿童事业发展的主要目标和策略措施。
In September 1991 the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress passed the Law on the Protection of Minors of the People's Republic of China. It clearly stipulates that "the state ensures that personal, property and other legitimate rights of minors not be infringed." It also gives provisions on various principles guiding the protection of minors and the responsibilities of family, school, society and judicial institutions in this respect. As a result, the protection of children is now within the scope of law. In 1992 the State Council issued An Outline Program for Chinese Children's Development in the 1990s. It gives concrete stipulations on the main goals and measures for the development of Chinese children in this century.
    针对近年来有的地区重新出现的拐卖妇女儿童的违法犯罪活动，各级司法机关依据全国人大常委会1991年通过的《关于严惩拐卖、绑架妇女、儿童的犯罪分子的决定》，惩处了一批拐卖妇女儿童的罪犯，使拐卖人口案件连年下降。1992年比1991年下降了35.2%，1993年比1992年下降了9%，1994年又比1993年下降了27.3%。
To counter the criminal activities of kidnapping and selling women and children, which have recurred in some areas in recent years, judicial departments at various levels have dealt out severe punishment according to the Regulations on the Severe Punishment of Criminals Who Kidnap and Sell Women and Children passed in 1991 by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress. Many criminals were brought to justice. Cases of kidnapping and selling people have declined since 1991, down 35.2 percent in 1992, 9 percent in 1993 and 27.3 percent in 1994.

为保障儿童的生命健康，国家大力发展妇幼保健事业，加强托儿所、幼儿园的卫生保健和保育水平。
To ensure the health of children, China has taken great steps to develop health care for women and children and improve the health-care level of kindergartens and nurseries. 

目前，全国有各级各类托儿所、幼儿园近45万所，大中城市儿童的入园要求基本上都能得到满足。目前，全国有各级妇幼保健机构3164个。中国对全国儿童实行计划免疫，控制和防治传染病。1994年，全国百日咳、白喉和破伤风接种率为92.76%，卡介苗、麻疹疫苗和脊髓灰质炎接种率分别为93.96%、89.37%和93.74%。中国儿童的预防接种率已接近世界发达国家的平均水平。中国政府已作出了在中国消灭脊髓灰质炎病的承诺。1991年以来，中国的婴儿死亡率、5岁以下儿童死亡率的年平均下降速度分别为4.6%和4.9%。
There are now nearly 450,000 kindergartens and nurseries all over the country. In big and medium-sized cities the demand for kindergartens and nurseries is basically met. There are 3,164 health-care institutions for women and children throughout China. To control and prevent infectious diseases, China has an immunity program for all children. In 1994 the rate of children inoculated against pertussis, diphtheria and tentanus was 92.76 percent. The rate of children inoculated with BCG, measles and polio vaccine was 93.96, 89.37 and 93.74 percent respectively. The rate of inoculated children in China is close to the average level of developed countries. The Chinese government has promised to wipe out polio in China. Since 1991 the infant mortality rate and that of children under five years of age have declined at an annual rate of 4.6 percent and 4.9 percent.
少数民族权利的保障　　
 Guarantee of Rights and Interests of Ethnic Minorities  
    中国有55个少数民族。中国不仅在宪法和法律上规定各民族一律平等，保障各少数民族的合法权益，而且明确规定要帮助少数民族和民族自治地区发展经济、文化等各项事业，在社会生活中尊重少数民族的风俗习惯。这是中国各民族之间能够长期紧密团结、和衷共济的根本原因。
There are 55 ethnic minorities in China. To guarantee the legitimate rights of ethnic minorities, China's Constitution and laws stipulate that all ethnic groups are equal. There are clear stipulations that help is to be extended to ethnic minorities and national autonomous areas for the development of their economy, culture and other undertakings and that the customs and habits of ethnic minorities are to be respected in social life. This is the fundamental reason that all ethnic groups in China have for a long time united closely, lived in harmony and helped one another.
    少数民族参加国家最高权力机关和地方各级权力机关的权利继续受到特殊保护。在第八届全国人民代表大会中，少数民族共有代表439人，占代表总数的14.7%，大大高于少数民族人口占全国人口8.04%的比例。国家重视培养和选拔少数民族干部参加各级政府工作。目前，在全国省(部)级干部总数中，少数民族干部占10.5%；在地(厅)级干部中，少数民族干部占7.9%。
The ethnic minorities' right to be represented in the highest organ of state power as well as in local organs of power at various levels has been continuously and specially guaranteed. Deputies to the Eighth National People's Congress include 439, or 14.7 percent, of ethnic minorities. This percentage is much higher than the percentage (8.04) of population of ethnic minorities in the country's total population. The state pays much attention to training and selecting cadres of ethnic minorities to work in governments at various levels. About 10.5 percent of all cadres at provincial or ministerial level are from ethnic minorities and 7.9 percent of cadres at prefectural or bureau level are from ethnic minorities.
    中国在少数民族聚居地区实行民族区域自治。为全面具体地落实《民族区域自治法》，1991年以来，中国制定了20多个民族区域自治条例和一批单行条例，进一步保障了各民族自治地方的自治权。在中国，各自治区主席、自治州州长、自治县县长都由实行区域自治的民族的公民担任。自治区、自治州、自治县的人民政府的其他组成人员，都尽量配备实行区域自治的民族和其他少数民族的人员。法律规定，上级国家机关的决议、决定、命令和指示，如有不适合民族自治地方实际情况的，自治机关可以报经上级国家机关批准，变通执行或者停止执行。民族自治地方的自治机关保障本地方各民族都有使用和发展自己的语言文字的自由，都有保持或者改革自己的风俗习惯的自由，以及依法保障各民族公民有宗教信仰自由。
China has instituted a system of regional autonomy in minority areas. In order to implement the Law on Regional National Autonomy, since 1991 China has formulated more than 20 regulations on regional national autonomy and some special regulations. This has further guaranteed autonomy in the national autonomous areas. In China the chairman of an autonomous region and the head of an autonomous prefecture or autonomous county are invariably citizens of the ethnic group that exercises regional autonomy. Other members of the people's government of an autonomous region, autonomous prefecture or autonomous county are also to be made up, as far as conditions permit, by citizens of the ethnic group that exercises regional autonomy or citizens of other ethnic minorities in that area. The law stipulates that autonomous organs can apply for permission from higher state organs to make alterations in or desist from implementing resolutions, decisions, orders and instructions made by higher-level state organs if they are not in accordance with the situation in autonomous areas. The autonomous organs in national autonomous areas guarantee that citizens of all the local ethnic groups have the freedom to use and develop their own spoken and written languages and to maintain or reform their customs and habits, and, according to law, guarantee that citizens of all ethnic groups enjoy freedom in religious belief.
    近几年，国家继续加强对散居少数民族的权利保障。1993年11月，经国务院批准，国家民委发布《民族乡行政工作条例》和《城市民族工作条例》，对保障散居少数民族的政治、经济、文化等各项权利作出了具体规定。
In recent years the state has continued to pay more attention to guaranteeing the rights and interests of ethnic minorities living in scattered communities. In November 1993, with the State Council's approval, the State Nationalities Affairs Commission promulgated Regulations on Administrative Work of Nationality Townships and Regulations on Urban Nationality Work. They give detailed provisions on how to guarantee the political, economic and cultural rights and interests of scattered ethnic minorities.
    国家对少数民族聚居地区的经济发展一直实行优惠政策，提供资金、技术、人才等方面的支援。1991年12月，国务院下达文件，要求各级政府增加对民族自治地方的投入，推进经济发达地区与民族地区的对口支援；要求各级各类银行适当照顾对民族自治地方固定资产投资项目贷款；各项扶贫资金和物资要更多地用于少数民族贫困地区。
The state has always implemented a preferential policy for the economic development of areas where people of ethnic minorities live in compact communities, providing funds, technology and personnel aid. In December 1991 the State Council issued a document requesting governments at all levels to increase input to the autonomous areas and to speed up the aid scheme whereby economically developed areas give aid to ethnic minority areas. It required banks at all levels to give appropriate preferential treatment to autonomous areas in terms of loans for projects of investment in fixed assets. More funds and materials allocated for assisting poor areas should be directed to poor ethnic minority areas.
    国家和经济发达地区对民族自治地区的支援，促进了民族自治地区的经济发展。1994年，民族自治地方工农业总产值比1990年增长73.8%，其中农业总产值增长28.1%，工业总产值增长109.1%，铁路通车里程增长27.5%。少数民族人民生活明显改善。1990年，民族自治地方职工年平均工资为2040元，1994年为3970元；农牧民人均纯收入1990年为546元，1994年为944元。
Aid provided by the state and developed areas to national autonomous areas has promoted their economic development. The total output value of industry and agriculture of autonomous areas in 1994 increased 73.8 percent over that of 1990, the agricultural output value increasing 28.1 percent, the industrial output value increasing 109.1 percent and railway lines open to traffic increasing 27.5 percent. The life of ethnic minorities has improved greatly. In 1990 the average yearly salary for workers and employees in autonomous areas was 2,040 yuan. It was 3,970 yuan in 1994. In 1990 the average yearly income for peasants and herders was 546 yuan. It was 944 yuan in 1994.
    由于西藏位于高寒地区，自然条件恶劣，历史上曾长期遭受封建农奴制的黑暗统治，经济文化较为落后，国家对西藏的发展给予特别照顾。1994年7月中央政府决定全国各地在西藏援建62项工程，计划投资23.8亿元。这些工程主要是水、电、路、能源、通讯、学校、医院等基础设施，目的是为西藏的全面发展奠定良好的基础。现已竣工交付使用的工程40余项，实际总投资已上升至30多亿元。这些工程的完成，有力地促进了西藏地区的经济发展，改善了藏族人民的生产生活条件，提高了藏族人民的生活水平。
Because of its high altitude, poor natural conditions and the dark rule of the feudal serf system for an extended period in the past, Tibet is comparatively backward economically and culturally, so the state has given special care to Tibet's development. In July 1994 the Central Government decided that the rest of China should help Tibet with 62 construction projects with an estimated investment of 2.38 billion yuan. The projects include mainly infrastructure, such as water supply, electricity, roads, power, telecommunications, schools and hospitals. The purpose is to lay a good foundation for the full-fledged development of Tibet. More than 40 projects have been completed and handed over for use. Actual investment has risen to over 3 billion yuan. Completion of these projects has vigorously promoted economic development in Tibet, improved the production and living conditions of Tibetans and raised their standard of living.
    由于历史、地理等方面的原因，目前少数民族地区的经济和社会发展水平与内地、沿海地区相比仍有很大的差距。中国政府为缩小这种差距已经作出了巨大努力，并取得了明显的成就。今后，政府将坚持不懈地继续努力，改变少数民族地区相对落后的面貌。
Because of historical and geographic reasons, there is still a big gap between the ethnic minority areas and inland and coastal areas in terms of economic and social development. The Chinese government has made great efforts to narrow the gap and has achieved obvious results. It will continue its efforts to bring about a change for the better in backward minority areas.
    中国政府历来尊重和重视维护少数民族的传统文化，投入了大量资金保护和维修少数民族的文物古迹。从1989年到1994年，政府共投资5300万元，对举世闻名的西藏布达拉宫进行全面维修，完成111个项目。这是十七世纪中叶清朝初年修建布达拉宫以来最大的一次维修工程。1991年以来，国家又投资3000多万元，组织人力、物力维修了藏传佛教的青海塔尔寺。
The Chinese government has always respected and valued the traditional culture of ethnic minorities. It has allocated large sums of money for the protection and maintenance of historical relics and sites of ethnic minorities. Between 1989 and 1994 the government invested 53 million yuan to completely renovate the world-famous Potala Palace in Tibet and finished 111 projects. This is the biggest renovation of the Potala Palace since it was constructed early in the Qing Dynasty in the mid-17th century. In 1991 the government invested more than 30 million yuan and provided manpower and material for the renovation of the Kumbum Monastery, an establishment of Tibetan Buddhism in Qinghai.
    国家大力扶持和发展少数民族的文化艺术。1992年3月，在云南省昆明市举办了全国56个民族参加的第三届中国艺术节。1995年1月，又在上海举办了全国56个民族音乐舞蹈邀请展演，促进了民族音乐舞蹈艺术的发展和繁荣。在政府的支持下，一些少数民族的文化艺术团与外国进行了交流。
The government makes great efforts to nurture and develop the culture and art of ethnic minorities. In March 1992 the third China Art Festival was held in Kunming, Yunnan Province, with 56 ethnic groups participating. In January 1995 a music and dance invitation performance of 56 ethnic groups was held in Shanghai, promoting the development and prosperity of national music and dance. With government support, a number of cultural and artistic troupes of ethnic minorities have visited foreign countries.
    国家一贯尊重和保障少数民族使用和发展本民族语言文字的权利。民族自治地方的自治机关在执行职务时，都依照本民族自治地方自治条例的规定，使用当地通用的一种或者几种语言文字。民族自治地方的广播、影视、图书、报纸、杂志，也都使用当地通用的一种或几种语言文字。1991年6月19日，国务院批转了国家民委《关于进一步做好少数民族语言文字工作报告的通知》，要求加强民族语文法制建设，搞好各民族语文的规范化、标准化和信息处理，促进各民族语文的翻译、出版、教育、新闻、广播、影视、古籍整理事业，推进各民族语文的学术研究、协作交流和人才培养。
The government has always respected and guaranteed ethnic minorities' right to use and develop their own spoken and written languages. In the performance of their functions the autonomous organs in autonomous areas use one or several local languages according to the regulations of autonomy set by the autonomous areas. Broadcasting, television, cinema, books, newspapers and magazines in autonomous areas use one or several local languages. On June 19, 1991, the State Council approved the Circular on the Report Regarding Further Improving Work on the Spoken and Written Languages of Ethnic Minorities submitted by the State Nationalities Affairs Commission and referred it to those concerned. The circular demanded strengthening the formulation of laws governing the use of native languages, standardizing the languages and information processing of the various ethnic groups, and promoting translation, publishing, education, news, broadcasting, television, films, the collating of ancient books, academic research, cooperation and exchanges in native languages and the training of personnel.
    1991年以来，在政府的支持下，少数民族传统医药学继续得到丰富和发展。民族自治地方从事藏、蒙古、维吾尔、哈萨克、傣等少数民族医药学的人员逐年增加，目前已达6000余人。民族医药机构和民间诊所达500余所。
Since 1991, with the support of the government, the traditional medical sciences and pharmacies of ethnic minorities have been enriched and developed. More and more people are now engaged in Tibetan, Mongolian, Uygur, Kazak, and Dai medical science and pharmacy--over 6,000 to date. There are over 500 hospitals and folk clinics of medicine of ethnic minorities.
    由于中国政府充分尊重和保障少数民族依法享有的各项权利，重视和支持民族自治地方的政治、经济和文化的发展，今天，中国的民族自治地方政治稳定，经济、文化日益发展，少数民族人民生活水平逐年提高。全国56个民族和睦相处，形成了各民族团结友好、相互支持、相互帮助的局面。
Since the Chinese government respects and guarantees all the rights and interests ethnic minorities are entitled to enjoy under the law, and since it pays much attention to and supports the political, economic and cultural development of autonomous areas, in China's minority areas today the political situation is stable, the economy and culture are developing and the life of ethnic minorities is improving every year. All 56 ethnic groups in China live in harmony, are united and friendly to one another, and support and help one another.
残疾人权益的保障　　
 Guarantee of the Rights and Interests of the Disabled 
    中国一贯重视残疾人各项权益的保障工作。一方面，中国政府采取各种措施，保护残疾人享有与其他公民平等的权利不受侵犯；另一方面，采取特殊扶助措施，帮助和促进残疾人在事实上平等参与社会生活，共享社会物质文化成果，初步建立起了一个残疾人人权保障体系。近几年，随着中国经济持续、快速、健康发展，中国残疾人的人权保障体系逐步走向完善。
China has all along attached importance to guaranteeing the various rights and interests of the disabled. On the one hand, China has adopted various measures to ensure that the disabled enjoy equal rights with other citizens and to protect their rights from infringement; on the other hand, China has adopted special support measures to help and promote the disabled to actually and equally participate in social life and share social material and cultural achievements by primarily setting up a guarantee system of human rights for the disabled. In the past few years, along with the sustained, rapid and healthy development of China's economy, China's guarantee system of human rights for the disabled has been perfected step by step.
    1990年12月全国人大常委会通过并于1991年5月施行的《中华人民共和国残疾人保障法》，使中国残疾人的人权保障有了专门的法律。为加强残疾人的人权保障工作，国务院成立了由33个部委和中国残疾人联合会组成的国家残疾人工作协调委员会。各省、自治区、直辖市以及各地、市、县也都成立了由各级政府领导的残疾人工作协调机构。
In December 1990 the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress adopted the Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of Disabled Persons, which came into force in May 1991. Hence China has a special law guaranteeing the disabled's human rights. To strengthen the work guaranteeing human rights for the disabled, the State Council founded the State Coordination Committee for Work on the Disabled, consisting of 33 commissions and ministries and the China Disabled Persons' Federation. Each province, autonomous region and centrally administered municipality and each prefecture, city and county has also founded a coordination organ for work on the disabled under the leadership of local governments at different level.
    使残疾人最大限度地得到康复，是使他们得以享受广泛人权的重要前提之一。到1994年底，中国已完成白内障复明手术123.2万例，矫治小儿麻痹后遗症41.7万人次，聋儿语言训练5.7万人。中国各级政府已在全国建立起社区康复站6558个。除此之外，还建立了低视力康复点574个，为2万多名低视力者配用了助视器；建立了智残儿童康复站463个，直接训练智残儿童4060名，培训家长和基层康复指导员3万多名。
To help the disabled recover maximum health is an important prerequisite for them to enjoy extensive human rights. By the end of 1994 China had performed 1.232 million cataract operations, rectified 417,000 people/time of polio sequelae and trained 57,000 deaf children in hearing and speech, Chinese governments at all levels have set up 6,558 community rehabilitation centers. In addition, China has founded 574 poor-eyesight rehabilitation centers, providing more than 20,000 poor-sighted people with sight aids, and established 463 rehabilitation centers for mentally retarded children, which have trained 4,060 mentally retarded children and over 30,000 parents and rehabilitation instructors in grass-roots units.
    中国特别注意保护残疾人劳动就业的权利。《中华人民共和国劳动法》及《全民所有制工业企业转换经营机制条例》等法规，均有保障残疾人劳动就业权利的明确规定。全国已有27个省、自治区、直辖市制定地方法规，规定本区域的机关和企事业单位要按比例安排残疾人就业，比例一般不低于职工总数的1.5%。到1994年底，全国集中安排残疾人就业的福利企业总数已达6万个。全国县以上城镇中，有劳动能力的残疾人就业率已经超过70%。
China pays particular attention to protecting the disabled's rights to labor and employment. The Labor Law of the People's Republic of China, Regulations for State-Owned Enterprises for Changes in Operating Mechanisms, and other laws and regulations all include specific regulations guaranteeing the disabled's rights to labor and employment. Twenty-seven provinces, autonomous regions and centrally administered municipalities in China have formulated local legislation specifying that the proportion of disabled people among total employees of government organs, enterprises and institutions should not be lower than 1.5 percent. By the end of 1994 the number of welfare enterprises mainly employing the disabled had reached 60,000 in China. Over 70 percent of disabled persons with labor abilities in cities and towns above the county level have been employed.
    让残疾人享有受教育的权利，是中国政府近几年大力开展的工作之一。政府为盲、聋、弱智儿童兴办了特殊教育学校和特殊教育班。到1994年底，全国已建残疾人特殊教育学校1241所、特殊教育班5301个，在校的盲、聋、弱智学生21万人。特殊学校、特殊班和在校残疾学生数分别比1990年增长224%、99%和416%。残疾人职业教育和培训机构已有370个，仅1994年就培训残疾人9.7万人次。中国每年都有数以千计的残疾学生进入高等院校学习。
To let disabled persons enjoy the right to receive education is work on which the Chinese government has expended great effort in recent years. The Chinese government has set up special-education schools and classes for blind, deaf and mentally retarded children. By the end of 1994 China had set up 1,241 special-education schools and 5,301 special-education classes for the disabled, and the number of blind, deaf and mentally retarded students had reached 210,000. The number of special schools, special classes and disabled students attending these special schools and classes increased by 224 percent, 99 percent and 416 percent respectively over the 1990 figures. There are 370 vocational education and training centers for disabled persons in China. In 1994 alone 97,000 people/time of handicapped persons were trained. In China thousands of disabled students enter colleges and universities every year.
    中国残疾人的精神生活日益丰富多样。近几年，全国各地广泛举办残疾人参加的各种文艺演出、体育比赛和书画、摄影、集邮等文化活动。1994年9月，中国政府在北京举办了第六届远东及南太平洋地区残疾人运动会，共有42个国家和地区的2000多名运动员参加比赛。为了办好这次体育盛会，中国政府投入了大量人力、物力和财力，并在运动会期间组织了3万多名志愿者为各国残疾人朋友服务。为此，联合国秘书长加利和13个国家的国家元首或政府首脑及国际残奥会主席发来贺电，高度评价中国政府和中国人民为残疾人事业所作的努力。
The spiritual life of the disabled in China has become rich and varied. In recent years all localities in China have held various performances, sports contests, and other cultural activities, such as calligraphy, painting, photography and philately, for the disabled. In September 1994 the Chinese government held the Sixth Far East and South Pacific Games for the Disabled in Beijing. Over 2,000 athletes from 42 countries and regions attended the games. To run the games well, the Chinese government poured huge human, material and financial resources into them and organized more than 30,000 volunteers to serve the handicapped friends from other countries. UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the heads of 13 states or governments and the chairman of the International Olympic Committee for the Disabled sent congratulatory telegrams to China, speaking highly of the efforts of the Chinese government and people for the cause of disabled people.
    近几年，为在中国形成理解、尊重、关心、帮助残疾人的社会环境，中国政府和社会各界进行了大量工作。在每年5月法定的“全国助残日”，全国各地广大群众积极参加助残活动，在活动中增加了对残疾人的理解和尊重。中国每年有3000多万少年儿童参加“红领巾助残活动”，至今已坚持8年，出现了许多扶老、帮残的动人事迹。许多大中城市的医院开展了为孤残儿童献爱心的活动，为他们实施脱残手术，使许多残疾孤儿得到了康复。
In recent years the Chinese government and various circles in the society have done a great deal of work to create a favorable social environment for people to understand, respect, care for and help disabled persons. On National Helping-the-Disabled Day, legally set in May every year, the broad masses of the people all over the country actively participate in activities to help the disabled, strengthening their understanding of and respect for the disabled. Every year over 30 million children take part in Young Pioneers Helping the Disabled activities, which have been carried out for eight years running. Many moving deeds of helping the aged and disabled have emerged. Many hospitals in large and medium-sized cities have conducted activities to show love to disabled orphans. By erforming operations on the disabled, they have helped many disabled orphans recover their health.
    为方便残疾人参与社会生活，中国制定和实施了《方便残疾人使用的城市道路和建筑物设计规范》，要求各地在市政建设与各种建筑物修建时，一定要相应建立符合中国国情与经济发展水平的无障碍设施。这几年，北京。上海、天津、广州、沈阳、深圳等大城市中，各种专门设置和建造的无障碍设施大为增加。
To help the disabled participate in social life, China has worked out and implemented Standards for the Design of Urban Roads and Buildings for the Disabled's Convenience, which require all localities to build obstacle-free structures in accordance with actual conditions and economic development in China when constructing municipal works and various buildings. The past few years have witnessed a great increase in various special installations and obstacle-free structures in Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, Guangzhou, Shenyang, Shenzhen and other large cities.
开展人权研究，普及人权知识　　
 Developing the Study of Human Rights and Popularizing the Knowledge of Human Rights 
    中国在全面推进人权事业的过程中，不仅重视促进社会发展，加强人权的法律、制度和物质保障，而且高度重视人权的理论研究和宣传普及。
In the process of advancing the cause of human rights in an all-round way, China has attached great importance not only to social development and reinforcement of the guarantee of laws, systems and materials on human rights, but also to the theoretical study, publicity and popularization of human rights.
    近几年，中国学者对人权理论的研究十分活跃，已经形成了一支遍布全国各地，由高等院校、研究机构的学者和有关专家组成的多学科的专业研究力量。“中国人权研究会”等全国性学术团体相继成立。一些高等院校和研究机构设立了人权研究中心、人权教研室或研究室。与此同时，研究妇女、儿童、残疾人等特殊群体人权的机构也大量出现。据不完全统计，自1991年以来，中国召开的规模较大的全国性人权理论研讨会有十几次，各种人权讨论会、座谈会、报告会百余次。中国人权研究会的代表团1993年参加了曼谷会议、维也纳世界人权大会，1995年参加了在北京举办的联合国世界妇女大会，与各国人权专家、人权组织进行了交流活动。
In the past few years Chinese scholars have been very active in the study of human rights theories. A professional research force consisting of scholars and experts from institutions of higher learning and research institutes all over the country has been formed. The Chinese Society for the Study of Human Rights and other national academic bodies have been set up one after another. Some institutions of higher learning and research bodies have set up human rights research centers and human rights teaching and research offices or research offices. Meanwhile, a large number of special human rights bodies for the study of the human rights of women, children and the disabled have emerged. According to incomplete statistics, since 1991 China has held over a dozen largescale national theoretical symposiums on human rights and over a hundred discussions, forums and reports on human rights. Delegations sent by the Chinese Society for the Study of Human Rights attended the World Human Rights Conference held in Bangkok and Vienna in 1993 and the UN World Conference on Women held in Beijing in 1995, at which the Chinese delegates conducted exchanges with human rights experts and organizations from all over the world.
    中国政府积极扶持和资助人权研究。“国家社会科学基金”、“中华社会科学基金”和“青年社会科学基金”资助的研究课题中，均包括若干项人权课题。每年都有一批有关人权的课题获得国家教委、中国社会科学院以及地方政府的资助，并陆续取得成果。此外，社会各界还成立了中国人权研究基金会，募集资金，资助人权研究活动。
The Chinese government actively supports and aids financially the study of human rights. The research subjects aided financially by the State Social Science Fund, the China Social Science Fund and the Youth Social Science Fund include a certain number of subjects on human rights. Every year a group of subjects on human rights win financial aid from the State Education Commission, the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences and local governments and achieve results. In addition, the China Human Rights Research Fund set up by various social circles collects funds and gives financial aids to research activities on human rights.
    中国学者结合当今世界的实际和中国的实践，对人权问题的各个方面进行深入的研究，发表了大量有见解的人权著作和论文。近几年，中国出版了上百种人权学术专著，在各种报刊杂志上发表的有关人权的论文数以千计。学术界的研究成果，对国家的人权政策的制定提供了有益的帮助，对于增强国民人权意识、促进社会发展产生了良好的影响。
In light of the current world situation and China's practice, Chinese scholars have made a deep study of the issue of human rights in various aspects and published a large number of books and theses expressing original ideas. In recent years nearly a hundred academic books on human rights have been published. Over a thousand theses on human rights have been published in various newspapers and magazines. The research achievements of academic circles have benefited the formation of state policies on human rights and exerted a favorable influence in strengthening the people's sense of human rights and promoting social development.
    中国学术界翻译出版了大量国外人权著作，编著了系统、全面、完整的人权研究资料。中国已出版《世界人权约法总览》、《人权研究资料丛书》、《国际人权文件与国际人权机构》等多本著作，上千万字。这些书籍不仅收集、整理和介绍了古今中外各种人权学说和思想，而且汇集了世界各国和国际社会有关人权的宣言、公约、议定书、决议和宪法性文件。
Chinese academic circles have also translated and published a large number of foreign books on human rights and compiled systematic, comprehensive and complete research data on human rights. China has published the General List of the World Conventions and Laws on Human Rights, Research Data Series on Human Rights, International Human Rights Documents and International Human Rights Organizations and many other books, totaling more than 10 million words. These books not only collect, sort out and introduce various ancient and modern, Chinese and foreign theories and ideologies on human rights, but also collect the declarations, conventions, agreements, resolutions and constitutional documents on human rights of all countries in the world and international societies.
    中国十分重视人权知识的普及和教育。近年来，中国国务院新闻办公室先后发表了《中国的人权状况》、《西藏的主权归属与人权状况》、《中国改造罪犯的状况》、《中国妇女的状况》等文件。社会各界围绕这些文件开展了广泛的讨论。出版界出版了各种学习材料和通俗读物，介绍人权的由来和历史演变，阐述国际社会人权的现状和中国在人权问题上的基本立场。电台、电视台和报纸杂志纷纷开辟专栏，就人权问题展开广泛的宣传和热烈的讨论。各地一些高等院校、研究机构、社会团体和政府有关部门举办了人权讲习班，普及人权基本知识。
China pays great attention to the popularization of knowledge of human rights. In recent years the Information Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China has issued in succession Human Rights in China, Tibet--Its Ownership and Human Rights Situation, Criminal Reform in China, The Situation of Chinese Women and other documents. All circles in the society started extensive discussions on these documents. Publishing circles have published various study information and popular literature to introduce the origin and historical evolution of human rights and expound on the current state of human rights in the international community and China's basic position on the issue of human rights. Broadcasting stations, TV stations, newspapers and magazines have started special programs and columns, which extensively propagate and heatedly discuss the issue of human rights. Some institutions of higher learning, research bodies, social organizations and relevant government departments throughout the country have run study groups to popularize basic knowledge of human rights.
    中国把人权的宣传教育与国家的法制建设密切结合起来。在《妇女权益保障法》、《未成年人保护法》、《残疾人保障法》、《劳动法》、《行政诉讼法》、《赔偿法》等法律颁布实施时，都开展了以增强公民的权利意识和法制观念为核心的宣传教育活动。目前，人权的宣传教育已纳入了国民教育和职业培训之中。各高等院校和培训机构普遍开设了人权专题讲座，一些大学开设了人权课程，系统讲授人权理论。人权宣传教育活动的普遍开展，提高了全体公民依法行使和享受人权的能力、素质和水平，增强了社会成员的主人翁意识和责任心，为人权事业的发展营造了良好的舆论环境和社会条件。
China closely integrates publicity and education on human rights with the state's construction of a legal system. When the Law on the Protection of Women's Rights and Interests, the Law on the Protection of Minors, the Law on the Protection of Disabled Persons, the Labor Law, the Law of Administrative Procedure and the Compensation Law were promulgated and implemented, China started publicity and education activities focused on strengthening citizens' consciousness of rights and laws. At present publicity and education on human rights have been included in national education and vocational training. Almost all institutions of higher learning and training organizations hold special lectures on human rights, and some universities have a human rights course to systematically teach theories of human rights. The widespread human rights publicity and education activities have improved all citizens' ability, quality and level in exercising and enjoying human rights according to law and strengthened their sense of being masters of their own affairs as well as a sense of responsibility, thus creating a favorable environment of public opinion and social conditions for the cause of human rights.
努力促进国际人权的健康发展　　
 Working Hard to Promote the Healthy Development of International Human Rights Activities
    中国一贯尊重《联合国宪章》促进人权和基本自由的宗旨与原则，近年来一如既往地积极支持和参与国际人权领域的活动，为促进冷战后国际人权领域的健康发展作出了新的努力。
China respects the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations related to the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms. In recent years China has, as always, actively supported and participated in international activities in the human rights field and has made new efforts to promote the healthy development of international human rights since the cold war.
    1994年4月，中国政府副总理兼外长钱其琛在会见联合国前秘书长瓦尔德海姆时重申：“中国尊重《世界人权宣言》、《德黑兰宣言》、《发展权宣言》等国际人权文书”，并“将一如既往地同国际社会一道，为更好地加强人权领域的国际合作而共同努力”。
In April 1994 Qian Qichen, Vice-Premier and concurrently Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Chinese government, reiterated while meeting with the former UN Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim, "China respects the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Proclamation of Teheran, the Declaration on the Right to Development and other international documents related to human rights" and "will, as always, make a joint effort with the international community to further strengthen international cooperation in the sphere of human rights."
    中国积极参加联合国人权领域的活动。近几年，中国连选连任联合国人权委员会成员国，派出代表团出席该委员会每年的例会。中国推荐的专家连续当选为防止歧视和保护少数小组委员会委员，并派代表团以观察员身份列席该小组委员会每年召开的会议。此外，中国还连续当选为联合国妇女地位委员会成员国，中国专家连续被选为联合国消除对妇女歧视委员会委员。中国多次派出代表团或官员参加联合国主办的各种人权会议。在上述各机构和会议中，中国认真履行职责，积极参加有关人权议题的审议和讨论，阐明自己的看法，为不断丰富人权概念内涵，促进对人权的普遍尊重作出自己的贡献。
China takes an active part in UN activities in the human rights field. In recent years China has consecutively been reelected a member of the UN Human Rights Commission and sends a delegation to the commission's annual session. The human rights experts recommended by China have continually been elected members of the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities. China sends observers to the annual session held by the subcommission. In addition, China has successively been elected a member of the UN Commission on the Status of Women, and Chinese experts have continually been elected members of the UN Commission on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women. China has many times sent delegations or officials to attend various conferences on human rights sponsored by the United Nations. In the aforementioned bodies and sessions China always conscientiously performs its duty, actively participates in the examination and discussion of subjects on human rights, and elaborates its views, making its contributions to constantly enriching the connotation of human rights and promoting universal respect for human rights.
    中国以积极的、建设性的态度参加了1993年在维也纳召开的世界人权大会。中国自始至终参加了那次大会的筹备工作，参加了联合国召开的四次筹备会议和亚洲区域筹备会议，并担任了第一次筹备会、亚洲区域筹备会和世界人权大会的副主席，对大会的筹备和成功发挥了重要作用。在亚洲区域筹备会上，中国与其他亚洲国家一道，为达成《曼谷宣言》，系统阐述亚洲国家在人权问题上的基本立场作出了积极努力。在世界人权大会召开期间，中国积极阐明自己的立场，同与会各国坦诚交换意见。中国与许多国家一道，坚决抵制和反对少数西方国家挑起对抗，将自己的观点强加于人，企图阻碍会议顺利进行的蛮横态度和做法。在会议最后文件的磋商过程中，中国政府代表团提出了许多建设性方案和建议，在坚持原则的基础上，以顾全大局和灵活合作的态度，处理、协调起草过程中的问题与矛盾，促进与会各国达成协商一致，使《维也纳宣言和行动纲领》得以顺利通过。
With an active and constructive attitude China took part in the World Conference on Human Rights held in Vienna in 1993. From beginning to end, China participated in the preparatory work of the conference, attended the four preparatory meetings held by the United Nations and the Asian Regional Preparatory Meeting, and served as vice-chairman of the First Preparatory Meeting, the Asian Regional Preparatory Meeting and the World Conference on Human Rights, thus playing an important role in the conference's preparation and success. At the Asian Regional Preparatory Meeting China, along with other Asian countries, made an active effort to reach agreement on the Bangkok Declaration and systematically elaborate the basic position of the Asian countries on human rights. During the World Conference on Human Rights China actively made clear its position and frankly and sincerely exchanged opinions with the countries attending the conference. Together with other countries, China resolutely resisted and opposed the rude and unreasonable attitudes and actions of a small number of Western countries that provoked confrontation and forced their views on others, trying to hinder the smooth progress of the conference. During consultations over the conference's final documents the Chinese government delegation put forward many constructive plans and suggestions and handled and coordinated the problems and contradictions that occurred during the drafting of documents on the basis of adhering to principle and, with a flexible and cooperative attitude, taking the situation as a whole into account, thus helping all countries to reach unanimity through consultation and achieve the smooth adoption of the Vienna Declaration and Program of Action.
    中国一贯支持联合国为提高妇女地位和促进男女平等所作的努力。1995年9月，中国成功地承办了联合国第四次世界妇女大会和’95非政府组织妇女论坛，为世界妇女事业的进步和妇女人权的实现作出了贡献。这是联合国成立以来规模最大的一次国际会议。来自197个国家和地区的4.6万多人会聚北京，围绕“平等、发展、和平”的主题，就妇女领域的广泛议题进行了热烈的讨论。中国政府代表团团长、全国人大常委会副委员长陈慕华当选为大会主席。中国代表团积极参加了会议各项议题的讨论，就提高妇女地位和促进男女平等的战略及一些重大的国际问题阐述了自己的观点，为会议通过具有重要历史意义的《北京宣言》和《行动纲领》作出了自己的贡献。中国政府认真履行东道国的义务，积极与联合国机构、各国政府和有关非政府组织密切合作，投入大量的人力、物力、财力，动员全国人民和各界妇女，为大会的筹备和召开作出了巨大努力，确保了大会的圆满成功，受到国际社会的普遍赞誉。联合国副秘书长基塔尼称：这次会议奠定了中国与联合国关系的新时代，是联合国妇女史上的一个里程碑。
China always supports the efforts of the United Nations to improve the status of women and promote equality between men and women. China successfully held the UN Fourth World Conference on Women and the '95 Nongovernmental Organizations Forum in Beijing in September 1995, thus contributing to the progress of the world's women and to the realization of women's human rights. It was the largest international conference since the founding of the United Nations. More than 46,000 people from 197 countries and regions gathered at Beijing and heatedly discussed various subjects concerning women with the theme of "equality, development and peace" as the core. Chen Muhua, head of the Chinese government delegation and Vice-Chairwoman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, was elected chairwoman of the conference. The Chinese delegation took an active part in the discussion of various subjects during the conference and expounded its opinions on the strategy to improve the status of women and promote equality between men and women and on some important international issues, making its own contributions to the adoption at the conference of the Beijing Declaration and the Program for Action, of important historical significance. The Chinese government performed its duties as the host country in great earnest, actively cooperated with the UN organizations, all governments and the nongovernmental organizations concerned, put in huge human, material and financial resources, and mobilized people all over the country and women from all walks of life to make tremendous efforts for the preparation and convening of the conference, to guarantee the great success of the conference. Hence China won popular praise from the international community. UN Under-Secretary-General Kitani said that the conference, which laid the foundation for a new era of relations between China and the United Nations, was a milestone in the UN women's history.
    中国迄今已先后批准或加入《1949年8月12日日内瓦四公约》及其两个《附加议定书》、《防止及惩治灭绝种族罪公约》、《禁止并惩治种族隔离罪行国际公约》、《消除对妇女一切形式歧视公约》、《消除一切形式种族歧视国际公约》、《关于难民地位的公约》、《关于难民地位的议定书》、《禁止酷刑和其他残忍、不人道或有辱人格的待遇或处罚公约》、《儿童权利公约》、《男女工人同工同酬公约》等15个国际人权公约。对加入的国际公约，中国政府都认真履行公约所规定的义务，通过立法、司法、行政等措施严格执行公约的规定，并按时提交有关公约执行情况的报告。
Up to now China has ratified and acceded to 15 international human rights conventions, including the four Geneva Conventions of August 12, 1949, and their two Additional Protocols, the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crimes of Apartheid, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, the Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees, the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Convention on the Rights of Children and the Convention Concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers for Work of Equal Value. The Chinese government has earnestly performed its obligations prescribed in the conventions it has acceded to, strictly implemented the stipulations of the conventions through legislative, judicial and administrative measures and submitted reports on implementation of the related conventions on time.
    中国按照《联合国宪章》的宗旨和原则，广泛开展国际人权领域的合作与交流。中国政府积极与联合国合作，对联合国人权中心和专题报告员转来的各种函件，均认真负责地进行调查研究，及时作出答复，陈述事实、看法和意见。
In accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, China has extensively conducted cooperation and exchanges in the international human rights field. The Chinese government actively cooperates with the United Nations. As to various letters and documents forwarded to China by the UN Center for Human Rights and special reports, the Chinese government has made serious and responsible investigations and given timely replies by elaborating facts, views and opinions.
    各国由于历史、社会、经济、文化等条件不同，对人权的认识和实践不同，这是正常的现象。为了加强各国在人权方面的相互了解和合作，中国积极主张和开展人权领域的双边对话和交流。近几年，中国领导人在与外国国家元首、政府首脑和有关人士会晤时，就人权问题与各方进行了建设性的讨论。中国与许多西方国家就人权问题进行了多轮对话，邀请了许多国家的人权官员和专家访华，还派出代表团赴一些国家就国际人权领域的有关问题交换意见和看法。
It is normal for countries to have a different understanding and practice of human rights owing to varied historical, social, economic and cultural conditions. To strengthen mutual understanding and cooperation among countries in terms of human rights, China actively advocates and holds dialogues and exchanges in the sphere of human rights. In recent years, when meeting heads of foreign states and governments and relevant personages, Chinese leaders have held constructive discussions with them on the issue of human rights. China has conducted multi-round dialogues with many Western countries on the issue of human rights and has invited human rights officials and experts from many countries to visit China. China has also sent delegations to some countries to exchange opinions and views on issues of international human rights.
    中国支持联合国依据《联合国宪章》规定的宗旨和原则，积极促进冷战后国际人权领域活动的健康发展。冷战结束后，国际形势发生了广泛而深刻的变化。世界人民特别是广大发展中国家迫切希望国际人权领域摆脱冷战时期政治对抗的阴影，走上平等合作的正确道路。但是，一些西方大国顽固坚持冷战时期的思维方式，将人权问题政治化、意识形态化，在国际舞台上把人权作为迫使发展中国家就范、推行霸权主义和强权政治的手段，使人权领域的政治对抗倾向变得愈加突出。针对国际人权领域的这种不正常现象，中国坚持原则，与广大发展中国家一道，为促进人权、维护主权、反对霸权进行了不懈的努力。
China has supported the United Nations in actively promoting the healthy development of activities in the international human rights field since the cold war in accordance with the purposes and principles prescribed by the Charter of the United Nations. Since the end of the cold war extensive and profound changes have taken place in the international situation. The people in the world, especially the people in developing countries, eagerly hope that international human rights will break away from the shadow of political confrontations of the cold war and follow the correct road of equal cooperation. However, some large Western countries stubbornly adhere to the modes of thinking of the cold war period to inject politics and ideology into the issue of human rights. On the international stage they take human rights as a means to compel developing countries to submit and a means to pursue hegemony and power politics, encouraging political confrontations in the human rights field. In view of this abnormal phenomenon in the international human rights field, China upholds principle and makes unremitting efforts to promote human rights, safeguard sovereignty and oppose hegemony, together with vast numbers of developing countries.
    近年来，美国等西方国家在一些国际会议上，对一些发展中国家的内部事务横加指责，施加种种压力。中国仗义执言，坚决抵制和反对西方国家这种毒化人权领域国际合作气氛的行径，支持发展中国家维护自身权益的斗争。
In the last few years the United States and some other Western countries have made unwarranted charges against the internal affairs of some developing countries and put various pressures on them at some international conferences. China has spoken out from a sense of justice, resolutely resisted and opposed their acts poisoning the international cooperative atmosphere in the human rights field, and supported the struggles of developing countries to safeguard their own rights and interests.
    1990年以来，美国等西方国家无视中国政治稳定、经济发展、社会进步、民主与法制日益完善、人民生活水平不断提高的现实，在联合国人权委员会连续五次抛出反华提案，粗暴干涉中国内政，企图破坏中国稳定，遏制中国发展，进而改变中国的发展道路和社会制度。他们四处游说，多方施压，以图达到其不可告人的政治目的。但是，在中国和广大亚非拉发展中国家及其他主持正义国家的坚决反对和抵制下，西方的反华图谋连续五次遭到挫败。这不仅是中国的胜利，也是广大发展中国家和国际正义力量维护《联合国宪章》宗旨和原则的胜利。
Since 1990 the United States and some other Western countries, disregarding China's political stability, economic development, social progress, daily perfection of democracy and the legal system and constant improvement of people's living standards, have concocted five anti-China proposals, wantonly interfering in China's internal affairs by trying to change China's development path and social system through sabotaging its stability and preventing it from going forward. They have gone everywhere to sell their ideas and impose pressure from various aspects, so as to reach their sinister political purposes. However, under the resolute opposition and resistance of China, the vast number of developing countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, and other countries that support justice, all five anti-China plots of the West have failed. It is a victory not only for China, but also for the vast number of developing countries and international justice forces in defending the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
　　中国认为，人权的实现离不开世界的和平与发展。和平与发展是当今世界的两大主题，也是实现普遍人权和基本自由的必不可少的前提。没有和平安定的国际环境，没有公正、合理的国际经济秩序，就不可能实现普遍的人权。国际社会只有将促进人权同维护世界和平、促进人类发展联系起来，系统地加以推进，才能取得持续有效的进展。
China considers that the realization of human rights cannot be separated from world peace and development. Peace and development are two major subjects in the current world, as well as indispensable prerequisites for the universal realization of human rights and basic freedoms. Without a peaceful and safe international environment and without a just and reasonable international economic order, it will be impossible to realize extensive human rights. So long as the international community integrates the promotion of human rights with defense of world peace and the accelerated progress of mankind and advances them in a systematic way, it can make sustained and effective progress.
　　当前，世界正处于世纪之交和新旧格局转换的历史性时期。把一个什么样的世界带入21世纪，是国际社会深切关注的重大问题。冷战结束以来，国际关系发生了一些积极的变化，同时也爆发了许多地区性冲突和错综复杂的深刻矛盾。霸权主义、强权政治和不公正的经济秩序依然存在，危及世界的和平与发展，阻碍人权和基本自由的实现。中国愿意继续与国际社会一道，为把一个和平稳定、经济发展和普遍享有人权的世界带入21世纪而不懈努力。
At present the world is in a historical era when a new century is coming and old world patterns are being replaced by new ones. What kind of world will enter the 21st century is an important issue of great concern to the international community. Since the end of the cold war some positive changes have taken place in international relations; meanwhile, many regional conflicts and complex and profound contradictions have broken out. Hegemony, power politics and unfair economic order still exist, imperiling world peace and development and hindering the realization of human rights and basic freedoms. China is willing, together with the international community, to make continual, unremitting efforts to bring a world of peace, stability, economic development and universally enjoyed human rights into the 21st century.
  

 

 
中国的计划生育
Family Planning in China 
中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China
一九九五年八月·北京
August 1995, Beijing

目　录
Contents
    前言
Foreword
     符合国情的战略决策 
A Strategic Policy That Suits National Conditions
     造福于民的社会事业 
 A Social Undertaking That Benefits the People
    国家指导与群众自愿相结合 
 Combination of State Guidance with Voluntary Participation by the Masses
    赢得人民的共识 
 Bringing the People to a Common Level of Understanding
    满足育龄群众生殖保健的需要 
 Satisfying the Reproductive Health Needs of People of Child-bearing Age
    在改革和发展中走向完善 
 Optimization Through Reform and Development
    保障人权的正确选择 
 The Correct Choice for Human Rights Protection
    结束语
Concluding Remarks
前　言
Foreword
　　人口过快增长是当今世界面临的一个十分严重的问题。时间每过一分钟，地球人口净增160人。联合国人口基金为此向国际社会敲响警钟：如不立即采取坚决行动控制人口，保持消费与发展的平衡，世界人口在下世纪中叶将达到125亿，人类也将无法得到持续发展。人口问题在全球范围出现，成为许多国家和地区面临的严重挑战。象中国这样人口众多的发展中国家，人口问题的挑战不仅关系到中华民族的生存和发展，也关系到人类社会的稳定和繁荣。中国是怎样迎接这一挑战的?中国为什么要作出计划生育的战略决策?在进行计划生育过程中采取什么政策和措施?效果又如何?我们将对此作出介绍和回答。
Excessive population growth is an extremely serious problem facing the contemporary world. Each minute, the earth's population is increased by 160 people. In face of this problem, the UN Population Fund sounded a warning to the international community: Lacking prompt and determined moves to control population and maintain a balance between consumption and development, the world population would be 12.5 billion people by the middle of the next century and humanity be unable to develop further. The global emergence of the population question poses a serious challenge to many countries and regions. For a populous developing country like China the challenge posed by the population question not only has a bearing on the survival and development of the Chinese nation but also affects the stability and prosperity of all human society. How is China taking up the challenge to deal with this problem? Why has China adopted the strategic policy of carrying out family planning? What policies and measures has it taken to implement its family planning programme and what results has it achieved? We shall introduce the problem and provide some answers.
符合国情的战略决策
A Strategic Policy That Suits National Conditions 

　　人口问题是关系中华民族生存与发展，关系中国现代化建设兴衰成败，关系人口与经济、社会、资源、环境能否相互协调和持续发展的重大问题。中国政府把实行计划生育，控制人口增长，提高人口素质确定为一项基本国策，是从国家富强、民族昌盛、人民幸福出发所作出的必然选择。
The population problem is an important question that touches upon the survival and development of the Chinese nation, the success or failure of China's modernization drive as well as the coordinated and sustained development between the population on one hand, and the economy, society, resources and environment on the other. It is a natural choice that the Chinese government has made to implement family planning, control population growth and improve the life quality of the population a basic state policy on the basis of a wish to make the state strong and powerful, the nation prosperous and the people happy.
　　中华人民共和国成立后，由于社会安定，生产发展和医疗卫生条件的改善，人民安居乐业，死亡率大幅度下降，人口迅速增长，人口再生产进入高出生、低死亡、高增长类型。应该指出，这是当时必然会出现的现象。问题是中国也同当时的国际社会未对全球人口膨胀迅速作出反映一样，错过了在建国后第一次人口出生高峰期间解决人口过快增长问题的时机。
After the founding of the People's Republic of China, due to the stability of the society, the development of production and the improvement of medical and health care conditions, the people lived and worked in peace and happiness. The death rate was reduced markedly, while the population increased rapidly, thus the situation then was characterized by more births, fewer deaths and high growth. It should be pointed out that this was an inevitable phenomenon at that time. But, just as the international community then was not responding promptly to the question of swelling global population, China lost the chance to solve the problem of over-rapid population growth in the first birth peak period after the founding of New China.
　　六十年代，中国进入了新中国建立后第二次人口出生高峰。从1962年至1972年，中国年平均出生人口2669万，累计出生了3亿。1969年中国人口突破了8亿。从六十年代开始人口与经济、社会、资源、环境之间的矛盾逐渐显露出来。鉴于这种情况，中国政府曾号召计划生育，提倡使用避孕药具。但是由于对人口问题的严重性认识仍不够深刻，政府没有制定明确的人口政策，因此计划生育没有能够在全国有效地推行。
In the 1960s, China's population entered its second peak birth period. From 1962 to 1972, the annual number of births in China averaged 26.69 million, totalling 300 million. In 1969, China's population exceeded 800 million. Beginning from the 1960s, the contradiction between the population on one hand, and the economy, society, resources and environment on the other had become gradually apparent. In view of the situation, the Chinese government issued a call for family planning and advocated the use of contraceptives. However, as there was still the lack of a deep understanding of the seriousness of the population problem and the government still had not worked out a clear population policy, family planning was not effectively carried out throughout the country.
　　从七十年代初开始，中国政府越来越深刻地认识到人口增长过快对经济、社会发展不利，决定在全国城乡大力推行计划生育，并将人口发展计划纳入国民经济与社会发展规划，计划生育工作进入了一个新的发展阶段。
From the early 1970s, the Chinese government had become increasingly deeply aware that the over-rapid growth of population was unfavourable to economic and social development and decided to energetically carry out family planning in both urban and rural areas and integrated the plan for population development into the plan of national economic and social development. Consequently, family planning work entered a new phase of development.
　　七十年代末，中国改革开放的总设计师邓小平在总结建国以来社会主义建设经验教训的基础上，深刻分析了中国的基本国情，指出要使中国实现四个现代化，必须考虑中国国家大、底子薄、人口多、耕地少的特点，揭示了人口与经济、社会、资源、环境必须协调发展的客观要求。邓小平在解决中国人口问题上主要的贡献是，把人口问题放到国民经济与社会发展的全局中来考察和处理，明确提出中国的人口政策是带有战略性的重大政策。根据邓小平的这一思想，中国政府把实行计划生育，控制人口数量，提高人口素质确定为一项基本国策，并在《中华人民共和国宪法》中作了明确规定，确立了计划生育工作在中国经济和社会发展全局中的重要地位。
At the end of the 1970s, Deng Xiaoping, the chief architect of China's reform and opening to the outside world, made an in-depth analysis of China's basic national conditions on the basis of the experience and lessons of socialist construction since the founding of the People's Republic, pointing out that, to accomplish the goal of the four modernizations in China, it was imperative to take into consideration the basic features of the Chinese environment, that is, the vast scale of the country, its weak foundation, its massive population and the low ratio of cultivated land, and this demonstrated the objective need for the development of population to be coordinated with the development of the economy, society, resources and environment. The major contribution Deng Xiaoping made to the solution of China's population problem is: To study and deal with the population problem in the overall context of the national economic and social development and clearly point out that China's population policy is an important policy of strategic significance. In accordance with Deng Xiaoping's thinking, the Chinese government has made it a basic state policy to carry out family planning and population control and to improve the life quality of the population, and has clearly incorporated it in the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, thus establishing the important position of family planning programme in China's overall task of national economic and social development.
　　1995年2月15日，中国总人口已达到12亿。近几年来，每年的出生人数都在2100万左右，每年净增人口1400万左右。如此庞大的人口总量和年人口增长量，对于中国这样一个底子薄、耕地少、经济文化水平比较落后和地区之间发展不平衡的国家来说，是一个沉重的负担。中国人口过多的不利影响已经渗透到社会经济生活的各个方面，中国在经济和社会发展中遇到的许多困难，都与它有直接的关系。
By February 15, 1995, China's population had reached 1.2 billion. Over the past few years, the annual births have averaged about 21 million, with a net annual increase of 14 million. Such massive total population and annual population growth constitutes a heavy burden for China, a country that has a weak foundation and little cultivated land, whose economic and cultural level is rather backward and where development is regionally imbalanced. The negative impact of China's overabundance of population has permeated all aspects of social and economic life; in fact, many difficulties China has encountered in its economic and social development are directly related to the problem of population.
　　中国广袤领土上的适合人们居住和从事经济活动的空间有限，人口分布极不平衡。中国的平原和丘陵面积分别占总土地面积的12.0%和9.9%，合计只有21.9%，而盆地、山地和高原的比例分别为18.8%、33.3%和26.0%，合计达78.1%。中国的不少山地、高原、丘陵和盆地是不适宜人居住的。中国适宜居住的湿润、半湿润地区只占47%；而干旱地区和半干旱地区则占53%。目前，中国94%的人口聚居在占全国总面积46%的东部，特别是自然环境较好、经济较发达的东南部地区。国家统计局利用1982年第三次人口普查数据测算出，中国有20.3%的人口居住在海拔500米以上的地区。与之比较，世界平均只有10%的人口居住在海拔400米以上的地方。中国目前尚有7000万贫困人口，其中大部分居住于地理环境比较恶劣的西部地区。显而易见，人口的贫困与他们所处的生存条件较差有着密切的关系。除此之外，中国的人均林地、草地、淡水资源分别只及世界平均水平的九分之一、三分之一和四分之一。“民以食为天”，解决12亿人口的吃饭问题，是对中国的巨大挑战。目前，中国耕地面积只有国土的十分之一，与之比较，印度耕地虽占国土的55%，人均耕地是中国的2倍；美国耕地虽只占国土的20%，但人均耕地是中国的9倍。中国的农业，特别是粮食生产面临最大的压力，就是人口不断增加，耕地不断减少。中国同美国、印度都是世界上粮食生产大国，在耕地面积小于美国、印度的条件下，中国的粮食产量却位居世界第一，粮食单产大大高于世界平均水平，但由于中国的人口数量几乎相当于美国的5倍，人均粮食占有量却不足美国的四分之一。1993年，中国虽然粮食生产获得丰收，但人均占有量只有387.3公斤。预测表明，由于人口规模将继续扩大，中国的人均粮食将长期维持在人均原粮不到400公斤的低水平上。如果中国不能有效地遏制人口的过快增长，不能缓解人口增长对土地、森林和水资源等构成的巨大压力，那么未来几十年后的生态和环境恶化将不可避免，这无疑会深深危及绝大多数中国人起码的生存条件和社会经济的可持续发展。
Over the vast territory of China, the space suited for people to live and engage in economic activities is limited and population distribution is extremely uneven. Plains and hilly land account for 12.0 percent and 9.9 percent respectively of China's total land area, totalling only 21.9 percent, while basins, mountains and plateaus account for 18.8 percent, 33.3 percent and 26.0 percent each, adding up to 78.1 percent. Many of the mountain, plateau, hilly and basin areas are unsuited for living. China's humid and semi-humid areas, appropriate for living, account for only 47 percent of the total land mass, while the arid and semi-arid areas account for 53 percent. Now, 94 percent of China's population live in the eastern part, which accounts for 46 percent of the country's territory, particularly in the southeastern region where the natural environment is better and the economy is relatively developed. The State Statistical Bureau estimates, on the basis of data collected in the third national census in 1982, that 20.3 percent of China's population live in areas over 500 metres above sea level, whereas in the world's population as a whole, only 10 percent live in areas over 400 metres above sea level. At present, there are still 70 million people in China living below the poverty level, of which the majority live in the western region where the geographic environment is harsher. Obviously, the poverty of the population is closely related to their poor living conditions. Besides this, China's per-capita average of forested land, grassland and freshwater resources amounts to only one-ninth, one-third and one-fourth of the respective world averages. "Food is the first necessity of the people." To solve the problem of feeding a population of 1.2 billion is a big challenge to China. Now, cultivated area in China accounts for only onetenth of its territory. In contrast, cultivated land in India accounts for 55 percent of its territory, with a per-capita average twice that of China. Although cultivated land in the United States makes up for only 20 percent of its territory, still its per-capita average is nine times that of China. The greatest pressure on China's agriculture, particularly grain production, is the continuous growth of the population and incessant shrinkage of the cultivated land. The United States and India, as well as China, are all major grain-producing nations in the world. Though its cultivated land is less than the United States and India, China ranks the first in the world in terms of grain output; its per-unit grain yield is much higher than the world average. But, as China's population is almost five times that of the United States, its per-capita share of grain is less than one-fourth of the latter. In 1993, despite a bumper harvest witnessed in China's grain production, the per-capita share of grain was only 387.3 kilogrammes. Forecasts show that China's per-capita share of grain will remain at the low level of less than 400 kilogrammes of crude grain for a long time due to the continued growth of the population size in the future. If China fails to effectively check the over-rapid growth of the population and alleviate the great pressure wrought by the population growth on cultivated land, forests and water resources, an ecological and environmental deterioration will become inevitable in the coming decades, profoundly endangering the minimum living conditions of the overwhelming majority of the Chinese people as well as the sustainable development of their society and economy.
　　中国劳动力充裕固然有利于发展的一面，但在资金短缺、资源相对不足的条件下，解决不断增长的劳动力就业问题是相当困难的。目前，全国每年有近2000万青年人进入劳动年龄，绝大部分人需要就业。中国农村剩余劳动力已经达到1.2亿人，到2000年，农村剩余劳动力将超过2亿。虽然国家采取多种措施广开就业门路，并已取得可喜成效，但还有相当多的人口处于待业或隐性失业状态。只有在大力发展经济，创造新的就业机会的同时，坚决控制人口增长，才能使劳动力增长和经济发展对劳动力的需求相适应。改革开放以来，尽管中国的经济发展速度较快，综合国力不断提高，国民生产总值已跃居世界前列，但由于人口多，中国的人均国民生产总值仍居世界后列，低于发展中国家的平均水平。由于人口增长过快，国家积累相对减少，能够用于教育、医疗、保健等社会事业的资金有限，要进一步提高人民的文化素质和健康水平，特别是广大农村人口和贫困地区人口的素质，困难不少。
On one hand, China's abundant labour force is of course conducive to development. On the other, however, it will be considerably difficult to tackle the problem of employment of a continuously growing labour force under the shortage of funds and the relative insufficiency of resources. Now, nearly 20 million young people reach working age in China every year, and most of them need jobs. The surplus labour force in China's rural areas has reached 120 million, and by the year 2000 the rural surplus labour force will exceed the 200 million mark. Although the state has adopted various measures to open up channels for employment and satisfactory results have been achieved, there are still considerably large amounts of people who are in the plight of job-waiting or recessive unemployment. Only by resolutely controlling the population growth while making energetic efforts to develop the economy and create new employment opportunities can it be possible to make the growth of the work force fall in step with the demand of the economic development for the work force. Despite the rapid pace of economic development, continuous improvements in China's overall national strength, and the leap of China to the world's front rank in gross national product since the adoption of reform and opening to the outside world, the country's per-capita gross national product still lags behind in the world and remains lower than the average level of the developing countries because of its huge population. Owing to the excessively rapid population growth, the state's accumulation has become relatively less, funds that can be invested in educational, medical and health care and other social services are limited, and there are significant difficulties in further improving the people's cultural quality and health level, particularly the life quality of the massive rural population and the population living in areas haunted by poverty.
　　中国政府正是为了实现持续的经济增长和可持续发展，满足全体人民日益增长的物质和文化需要，保证当代及子孙后代人民的根本利益和长远利益，而选择了实行计划生育这一战略决策。事实已经并将继续证明，在大力发展经济的同时，全面推行计划生育，是中国20世纪下半叶及以后一项利在当代、功在千秋的正确决策。
It is precisely for bringing about a sustained economic growth and sustainable development, satisfying the daily increasing material and cultural demands of the whole people, and guaranteeing the fundamental and long-term interests of the current generation and their posterity, that the Chinese government has chosen the strategic policy of family planning. Facts have proved and will continue to prove that, while making energetic efforts to develop the economy, the comprehensive promotion of family planning was the correct policy decision, taken in China since the latter half of the 20th century, which bring benefits to the present and constitutes a meritorious service for the future.
造福于民的社会事业
 A Social Undertaking That Benefits the People
　　中国的改革开放和经济建设的发展，为实行计划生育创造了良好的社会经济环境，而实行计划生育所取得的成就，又为经济的持续增长、人民生活水平的提高和社会的全面进步创造了有利的人口环境。
China's reform and opening to the outside world as well as its economic development have created a favourable socioeconomic environment for family planning, while the achievements of family planning have in turn created a favourable population environment for the continuous development of the economy, the improvement of the people's living standards as well as the overall progress of society.
　　计划生育有效地抑制了中国人口增长过快的势头。
Family planning has effectively checked the trend of over-rapid population growth.    
    从中华人民共和国成立到1964年的15年间，中国人口从5亿增加到7亿，每增加1亿人口平均需要7.5年的时间。从1964年到1974年，是中国人口高速增长的时间，10年内人口由7亿增加到9亿，每增加1亿人口的时间缩短为5年；1973年，中国在全国范围内实行计划生育，从1973年到1995年2月，中国人口由9亿增加到12亿，每增加1亿人口所需时间，又延长到7年左右。进入九十年代以来，中国虽然处于1949年后第三次人口出生高峰期，20—29岁生育旺盛期的妇女人数平均每年超过1亿人。如此庞大的生育人群，其生育潜力是巨大的。但是，由于中国现行的人口与计划生育方案和政策得到了人民的理解和支持，随着中国经济、社会的发展，人们的生育水平不断下降，有效地抑制了人口过快增长的势头。1994年与1970年相比，人口出生率由33.43‰下降到17.70‰，人口自然增长率从25.83‰下降到11.21‰，妇女总和生育率从5.81下降到2左右。目前，中国城市人口已基本实现了向低出生、低死亡、低增长的人口再生产类型的转变，农村人口正处于这一转变过程中。根据联合国提供的资料，中国的人口增长率已明显低于世界其它发展中国家的平均水平。据有关专家推算，如果中国不实行计划生育，至今仍保持七十年代初期的出生水平，现在中国人口很可能已经超过15亿。20多年来，中国实行计划生育，创造了有利于改革开放与社会经济发展和保障中国生存与发展的人口条件。
In the 15 years from the founding of the People's Republic to 1964, China's population increased from 500 million to 700 million, and on average 7.5 years were needed for the population to increase by 100 million. The 1964-74 period was one of high-speed growth where China's population increased from 700 million to 900 million in ten years, and the time needed for the population to increase by 100 million was shortened to five years. In 1973, China began to promote family planning throughout the country. China's population increased from 900 million to 1.2 billion in the period from 1973 to February 1995, and the time needed for the population to increase by 100 million was again lengthened to around seven years. China has been through the third post-1949 peak period of births from the beginning of the 1990s, the community of women in their prime of fertility (aged 20 to 29) has exceeded 100 million each year on average, and such a huge child-bearing community has a great birth potential still. But, because China's current population and family planning programmes and policies have won understanding and support from the people, the fertility level of the population has steadily reduced and the trend of overrapid population growth has been effectively checked along with the country's economic and social development. Compared with 1970, in 1994 the birth rate dropped from 33.43 per thousand to 17.7 per thousand; the natural growth rate, from 25.83 per thousand to 11.21 per thousand; and the total fertility rate of women, from 5.81 to around 2. Now, China's urban population has basically accomplished the change-over to the population reproduction pattern characterized by low birth rate, low death rate and low growth; and the rural population is currently in this process of change-over. According to statistics supplied by the United Nations, China's population growth rate has already been markedly lower than the average level of other developing countries. According to calculation by experts, if China had not implemented family planning but had all along kept the birth rate at the level of the early 1970s, its population would possibly have passed the 1.5 billion mark by now. Over the past two decades and more, China's promotion of family planning has created a population environment conducive to reform and opening to the outside world and socioeconomic development as well as the population conditions for safeguarding the survival and development of China.
　　计划生育促进了人民群众婚姻、生育、家庭现念的转变。
Family planning has promoted the change of people's concepts regarding marriage, birth and family.    
    自中国实行计划生育以来，随着改革开放和社会经济的发展，人们的婚姻、生育、家庭观念已经和正在发生着深刻的变化，传统的“早婚早育”、“多子多福”、“重男轻女”等观念正在为越来越多的育龄群众所摈弃；晚婚晚育、少生优生，男孩、女孩都一样，建立幸福、美满、和谐的小家庭，追求现代、科学、文化生活方式，已经成为不可阻遏的时代潮流。妇女早婚比例下降，平均初婚年龄提高。1992年，早于20周岁初婚妇女占初婚妇女总数的比例下降到12.9%。1970年妇女平均初婚年龄为20.2岁；1993年为22.67岁，提高了2.47岁。家庭规模逐渐缩小，核心家庭正在成为当代中国家庭的主要形式。据中国第四次人口普查，1990年平均家庭规模为3.96人，比1971年的4.84人减少了0.88人。家庭规模缩小的主要原因是生育子女数量的减少。1993年与1970年相比，在当年出生的孩子中，一孩率、二孩率分别由20.7%和17.1%上升为61.3%和27.5%，多孩率则由62.2%下降到11.2%。到1994年，全国累计有4676万对夫妇自愿终身生育一个孩子，占已婚育龄妇女总数的20.3%。在中国现有经济发展水平和人民生活条件下，家庭规模的缩小和抚养子女人数的减少，显然大大减轻了家庭的经济负担和家务负担，提高了家庭的生活质量。
Since the implementation of the policy of family planning in China, profound changes have been taking place in people's concepts of marriage, birth and family along with the reform and opening to the outside world as well as socio-economic development; the traditional ideas of "early marriage and early births," "more children, greater happiness," and "looking up on men and down on women" are being discarded by more and more people at the child-bearing ages. Late marriage and late births, fewer and healthier births, viewing male and female children as the same, establishing happy, perfect and harmonious small families and seeking a modern, scientific and civilized way of life have become an irresistible trend of the times. The rate of early marriage for women has come down and their average age at first marriage has gone up. In 1992, the proportion of women entering first marriage before the age of 20 dropped to 12.9 percent of the total number of firstmarriage women. In 1970, women's average age at first marriage was 20.2 years, while in 1993 it was 22.67 years, up 2.47 years. The family size has become gradually smaller and nucleus family is becoming the major form of modern Chinese families. According to China's fourth national census, the average size of families in 1990 was 3.96 persons, 0.88 person less than the 4.84 persons in 1971. The major reason for the reduction of family size is a reduction in the number of births. Compared with 1970, of the babies born in 1993 the first-birth rate and second-birth rate increased from 20.7 percent and 17.1 percent to 61.3 percent and 27.5 percent respectively, and the multiple-birth rate dropped from 62.2 percent to 11.2 percent. By 1994, a total of 46.76 million couples had volunteered to give birth to only one child throughout the country, accounting for 20.3 percent of the total married women at child-bearing age. At the current level of economic development and living standards in China, the reduction of family size and fewer children to support have obviously reduced the economic burden and the burden of family chores on the families and improved their quality of life.
　　计划生育为中国经济的发展和人民生活水平的提高创造了有利条件。
Family planning has created favourable conditions for the development of China's economy and the improvement of people's living standards.    
    中国大力开展计划生育，力图使人口增长速度大大低于国民生产总值的增长速度，从而逐步提高人均水平。近十几年来，中国经济持续发展，人民生活日益改善。除了改革开放等因素外，也得益于计划生育。1952年至1978年，中国国内生产总值增长3.7倍，但人均国内生产总值仅增长了1.8倍。1978年至1994年，中国在坚持改革开放、大力发展经济的同时，坚持做好计划生育工作，国内生产总值增长了3.2倍，人均国内生产总值增长了2.4倍。同期，随着人民生活质量和购买力的提高，中国消费品市场扩大了12.7倍，消费品零售总额平均年递增17.2%。1994年，中国社会消费品零售总额为16053亿元，中国已成为世界上最有潜力的市场。与1978年相比，中国人民的生活水平明显提高，城镇居民人均生活费收入增加9倍，平均每年递增15.5%；农村居民家庭人均纯收入增加8倍，平均每年递增14.8%。中国城镇人均住房面积由3.6平方米增加到7.5平方米，农村人均居住面积由8.1平方米增加到20.8平方米。绝大多数家庭的吃、穿、用、住等基本生活需要得到满足。电视机、收录机、电冰箱、洗衣机等耐用消费品的普及率接近中等发达国家水平。
In vigorously promoting family planning, China strives to make the speed of population growth much lower than the speed of growth in the gross national product, thus gradually raising the per-capita level. A part from the reform and opening to the outside world, family planning has been a factor for the sustained economic development of China and the steady improvement of its people's living standards over the past ten years and more. From 1952 to 1978, China's gross domestic product (GDP) increased 4.7-fold. The per-capita GDP, however, increased by only 2.8-fold. From 1978 to 1994, while upholding reform and opening to the outside world and making great efforts to develop the economy, China persisted in doing a good job in family planning. In this period, the GDP went up 4.2-fold and the per-capita GDP increased 3.4-fold. During the same period, thanks to improvements in the quality of people's lives and the rise in their purchasing power, China's consumer goods market expanded 13.7-fold, and the total retail sales volume of consumer goods increased by an annual average of 17.2 percent. In 1994, the total volume of retail sales of consumer goods in China was 1,605.3 billion yuan. China has become a market with the greatest potential in the world. Compared with 1978, living standards have markedly improved, the urban people's per-capita incomes for living expenses increased 10-fold, at an annual increase of 15.5 percent; the per-capita net incomes for rural families went up 9-fold, at an annual increase of 14.8 percent. In Chinese cities and towns, the per-capita housing increased from 3.6 square metres to 7.5 square metres, and in the rural areas it increased from 8.1 square metres to 20.8 square metres. For the overwhelming majority of families, the basic needs of living, such as food, clothing, daily-use articles and housing, were met. The possession rate of durable goods, such as TV sets, cassette tape recorders, refrigerators and washing machines, approached the level of the moderately developed countries.
　　计划生育促进了中国人口素质的提高和人的全面发展。
Family planning has promoted the improvement of the quality of the Chinese population in terms of education and health as well as the overall development of the people.
    中国的计划生育，始终包含着控制人口数量和提高人口素质两个方面。在合理控制人口规模的同时，中国政府十分重视发展教育、医疗卫生等各项事业。不断提高人口素质。1949年以前，中国的人口死亡率高达20‰，七十年代末下降到7‰以下。1949年到1990年，人口平均预期寿命从35岁上升到68.55岁，其中男性66.84，女性70.47岁，成为世界上平均预期寿命提高最快的国家之一。中国的卫生基础设施已得到较大改善，全国平均每万人医院床位数从1970年的13.3张增加到1994年的23.6张，每万人专业卫生技术人员数由1970年的17.5人增长到1994年的35人。各种传染病的发病率大幅度下降。全国城乡居民的营养状况有了较大改善，平均每人每日摄取的热量为2600千卡，蛋白质为75克，已达到和接近世界平均水平。妇幼保健事业不断发展，目前中国城乡已基本形成计划生育和妇幼保健服务网络。1990年婴儿死亡率已从建国前的200‰下降到35‰，孕产死亡率为94.7/10万，新生儿计划免疫率达到85%。人民在卫生和健康方面的一些主要指标已经大大领先于同等经济发展水平的国家，正在逐步缩小与发达国家的差距。中国政府把教育作为国家发展的战略重点之一，教育事业得到长足的发展。中国正在有计划、有步骤地实行九年义务教育。1994年，全国各级各类学校在校生已达2.7亿人，学龄儿童入学率达到98.4%，青壮年的文盲率已降到7%，在占全国人口91%的地区中普及了初等教育。大城市和部分发达地区基本普及了初级中等教育。幼儿教育和残疾儿童的特殊教育稳步发展。中等职业技术教育迅速发展，在校生达到844.6万人，占整个高中阶段在校生总数的56%。全国有2亿多农民接受了各类文化知识教育和实用技术教育。
China's family planning has always included the two aspects of controlling the population size and improving the population quality in terms of education and health. While making efforts to control the population at an appropriate size, the Chinese government has devoted great attention to developing educational, medical and other services in order continuously to improve the quality of the population in terms of education and health. Prior to 1949, the mortality rate was as high as 20 per thousand, while by the end of the 1970s it had dropped to below 7 per thousand. From 1949 to 1990, the life expectancy rose from 35 years to 68.55 years--66.84 years for males and 70.47 years for females, making China a country where the life expectancy increased the most rapidly. Great improvements have been witnessed in the basic facilities for public health in China. Throughout the country, the average number of hospital beds for every 10,000 people increased from 13.3 in 1970 to 23.6 in 1994, and the average number of professional medical workers and technical workers in the field of medicine for every 10,000 people went up from 17.5 in 1970 to 35 in 1994. The incidence of various contagious diseases has markedly dropped. The diet of urban and rural people throughout the country has greatly improved, the per-capita daily calorie intake has reached 2,600 Kcal. and that of protein has reached 75 grammes, having reached or approaching the world average levels. Health care for women and children has continuously expanded. Now, family planning as well as maternity and child care networks have been basically formed in China's urban and rural areas. The mortality rate for babies dropped from 200 per thousand prior to the founding of the People's Republic to 35 per thousand in 1990, the death rate of expectant and new mothers was 94.7 per 100,000, and the rate of planned immunity for new-born babies reached 85 percent. The major indexes of people's medical care and health have already far outstripped countries at the same level of economic development, and the gap with the developed countries is being gradually narrowed. The Chinese government has taken education as a strategic key for the country's development, and great progress has been made in this field. China is now accomplishing the goal of nine-year compulsory education in a planned and systematic way. In 1994, the enrolment at schools, at various levels and of various kinds throughout the country, already reached 270 million, the schooling rate of school-age children reached 98.4 percent, the illiteracy rate of young and middle-aged people dropped to 7 percent, primary education was made universal in areas with 91 percent of the country's population, the major cities and some of the developed regions basically popularized junior middle school education, and infant education as well as the special education for handicapped children developed steadily. Secondary vocational and technical education developed quickly, and enrolment has reached 8.446 million, accounting for 56 percent of the total number of students at the level of senior middle school. Countrywide, over 200 million farmers have received various kinds of education in general knowledge and practical skills.
　　计划生育进一步解放了妇女生产力有利于妇女地位的改善和提高。
Family planning has further liberated the female productive forces and helped improve the status of women.
    中国实行计划生育，使妇女摆脱了婚后频繁生育的状况和繁重的家庭负担，进一步解放和发展了妇女中蕴藏的社会生产力，使她们有更多的机会学习科学文化知识，参与经济和社会发展活动，从而极大地推动了中国妇女经济、社会和家庭地位的提高。妇女就业率不断提高，就业领域不断扩大。到1992年底，中国女职工人数已达5600万人，占全部职工总数的38%，比1985年的4500万人，增长24.1%。1979年至1988年，城镇妇女就业增长率一直高于男性，年平均增长率为4.9%，比全国职工队伍的年平均增长率高出1.27个百分点。中国妇女的绝大多数在农村，是中国农业生产和多种经营的主力军。她们是实行计划生育最主要的受益人口群体。1989年，中国在农村发起的“双学双比”(学文化、学技术，比成绩、比贡献)活动，吸引了1.2亿农村妇女参加，其中9000多万人接受了实用技术培训，有1.5万多人获得省以上先进女能手称号，51万多人被评为农民技术员，出现了106.7万个以妇女为主的科技示范户。中国农村中约有4000万妇女在乡镇企业就业，占乡镇企业从业人员总数的47%。实行计划生育使妇女有更多受教育的机会，有利于提高妇女的文化素质。目前，中国城市成年女性平均上学年数是9.97年，其中高中及其以上者占56.3%，初中33.3%，小学8.3%，文盲半文盲仅占2.1%；而其母亲一代高中以上者仅占9.1%，初中11.1%，小学24.5%，文盲半文盲为55.3%。农村成年女性目前文化程度达到高中及其以上者为8.9%，初中26.6%，小学27.9%，文盲半文盲为36.6%；而其母亲一代高中以上者仅占0.5%，初中1.9%，小学9.0%，文盲半文盲高达88.6%。
Family planning in China has extricated women from frequent births after marriage and the heavy family burden, further liberated and expanded the social productive forces latent in women, and provided them with more opportunities to learn science and general knowledge and take part in economic and social development activities, hence greatly promoted the improvement of the Chinese women's status in economic and social affairs as well as in their families. The employment rate of women has steadily increased and sphere of employment has continuously expanded. By the end of 1992, the number of female staff and workers had reached 56 million in China, accounting for 38 percent of the national total of staff and workers and representing a 24.1 percent increase over the 45 million in 1985. In the 1979-88 period, the growth rate of employment for urban women had always been higher than that for men, with the average annual increase standing at 4.9 percent, 1.27 percentage point higher than the average annual increase of all staff and workers countrywide. The overwhelming majority of Chinese women are located in the countryside, and they are the major force of the agricultural production and diversified economy in the country. They are that part of the population to benefit most from the policy of family planning. In 1989, a move of "double learnings" (of general knowledge and techniques) and "double competitions" (in achievements and contributions) was launched in China's rural areas, appealing to 120 million rural women. Of this total, more than 90 million received training in practical techniques, over 15,000 were cited as model women workers at and above the provincial level, more than 510,000 were given the title of farmer technician, and 1.067 million scientific and technological demonstration households, with women as the major body, came to the fore. In China's rural areas, some 40 million women are employed in township enterprises, accounting for 47 percent of the total work force in these enterprises. Family planning has provided women with more opportunities to receive education and is conducive to raising their educational qualities. At present, the average schooling for adult women in China's urban areas totals 9.97 years. Of these women, those who have received education of senior middle school or higher account for 56.3 percent; those who have received junior middle school education account for 33.3 percent; those who have received primary school education account for 8.3 percent; and those who are illiterate and semi-illiterate account for only 2.1 percent. For the previous generation, however, those with senior middle school education and higher account for only 9.1 percent; those with junior middle school education, 11.1 percent; those with primary school education, 24.5 percent; and illiterates and semi-illiterates, 55.3 percent. For adult women in the rural areas, those with senior middle school education or higher make up 8.9 percent; those with junior middle school education, 26.6 percent; those with primary school education, 27.9 percent; and illiterates and semi-illiterates, 36.6 percent. For the previous generation, those with senior middle school education or higher account for only 0.5 percent; those with junior middle school education, 1.9 percent; those with primary school education, 9.0 percent; and illiterates and semi-illiterates, 88.6 percent.
　　计划生育促进了中国农村消除贫困的进程。
Family planning has accelerated the process of eradicating poverty in rural China.
    在中国的贫困地区，经济、文化落后与过多生育往往互为因果。在贫困地区实行计划生育，控制人口数量，提高人口素质，是中国政府进行扶贫开发，消除贫困的一项重要举措。1978年以来，国家采取了一系列措施，使没有完全解决温饱的人口从2.5亿人减少到1995年的7000万人。中国政府把解决贫困人口问题与计划生育结合起来，使许多家庭从“越穷越生，越生越穷”的不良循环中解脱出来，收到了显著效果。在已经脱贫的人口中，实行计划生育的农户往往占有明显的优势。计划生育在中国社会所产生的积极影响是广泛而又深远的。随着时间的推移，计划生育造福于民、惠及子孙后代的功效，必将进一步显现出来。
In China's poor areas, economic and cultural backwardness and too many births often interact as both cause and effect. The Chinese government has taken an important step in giving support to the development of poor areas to alleviate poverty by promoting family planning, holding population growth under control, and raising the life quality of the population in those areas. Since 1978, the state has adopted a series of measures to make those living below the poverty line drop from 250 million to 70 million in 1995. The Chinese government has combined the solution of the problem of the portion of society living under the poverty level with family planning to free families from the vicious cycle of "the poorer they are, the more children they give birth to, and the more children they give birth to, the poorer they become." In this respect, marked achievements have been obtained. In the community that have extricated themselves from poverty, farming households that have implemented family planning are often in a clearly advantageous position. The positive impact produced by family planning on Chinese society is wide and profound. With the passing of time, the benefits of family planning, for the people and for posterity, are bound to be more apparent.
国家指导与群众自愿相结合
 Combination of State Guidance with Voluntary Participation by the Masses
　　中国地广人多，地区之间、城乡之间、民族之间的差异较大，推行计划生育是一项十分复杂的工作。中国政府根据国情制定人口和计划生育政策、人口控制目标时，既考虑到国家社会经济发展的需要和国家的长远利益，也考虑到不同地区、不同民族、不同社会阶层的实际情况和群众的意愿与接受能力，把国家指导与群众自愿结合起来。
Due to its vast territory, large population and the great differences between regions, urban and rural areas and ethnic groups, the promotion of family planning in China is a highly complicated task. When working out the policies of population and family planning, and the objectives of population control in accordance with the actual conditions in the country, the Chinese government took into consideration the needs of the social and economic development of the state and its longrange interests, as well as the actual conditions of different regions, ethnic groups and social strata, the people's wishes and attitudes, to combine state guidance with voluntary participation by the masses.
　　国家指导与群众自愿相结合，是中国实行计划生育始终坚持的一条重要原则，也是中国计划生育事业取得成功的根本保证。国家指导主要表现在，中央和地方政府根据国情民意并通过立法程序，制定控制人口增长、提高人口素质、优化人口结构的政策法规；制定宏观人口发展计划，并将其纳入国民经济和社会发展的总体规划之中；把人口与计划生育工作列入政府的重要议事日程，组织协调各有关部门和群众团体制定并实施人口与计划生育方案，提供必要的资金和条件，保证人口与计划生育事业的需要；通过向全民进行广泛深入的宣传教育，为所有夫妇和个人提供生殖保健、避孕节育、优生优育等方面的指导和服务，以满足所有夫妇和个人合理安排家庭生育计划的需求。
The combination of state guidance with voluntary participation is an important principle China has always followed since the implementation of the family planning policy, and is the fundamental guarantee of success for the family planning programme as well. The main manifestations of state guidance include: The central and local governments, in accordance with the national conditions and people's will, and through legislative procedures, have formulated the policies, laws and regulations concerning the control of population growth, the improvement of the life quality of population and the optimization of the population structure; worked out the macro population development plan, and integrated it in the overall plan for national economic and social development; placed population control and family planning in the government's major agenda, organized and coordinated all relevant departments and mass organizations to draw up and implement the programmes on population and family planning, and provided necessary funds and conditions to guarantee the needs of both causes; and, through extensive and in-depth publicity and education all over the country, provided guidance and services to all couples and individuals in terms of reproductive health care, contraception and birth control, healthy child birth and rearing to help them in proper arrangement of family planning.
　　群众自愿主要表现在，所有夫妇和个人在国家的有关政策和法规的指导下，实行家庭生育计划的权利得到保护和尊重。夫妇和个人在行使其生育权利时，要考虑到对国家和社区的责任和义务，以及家庭和每个成员的健康和幸福。夫妇和个人在获得有效的信息、咨询和服务的基础上，根据其年龄、健康、工作以及家庭经济状况，负责任地、有计划地安排怀孕和生育，并选择适宜的避孕节育方法，以生育健康的孩子，建立文明、幸福的家庭。
Voluntary participation is mainly manifested in the fact that, under the guidance of the state's relevant policies and legislation, the right of all couples and individuals to carry out family planning is protected and respected. While exercising their right of child bearing, couples and individuals must take into account their responsibilities and duties to the state and community, and the health and happiness of the family and all its members. On the basis of effective information, advice and services and in accordance with the age, health, work and family economic conditions, couples and individuals can arrange for pregnancy and child bearing in a responsible and planned way, and select proper contraceptive methods so as to have healthy children and happy, progressive families.
　　制定符合国情、体现分类指导的计划生育政策，是实行国家指导的重要组成部分。中国现行的计划生育政策的主要内容是：提倡晚婚晚育，少生优生；提倡一对夫妇生育一个孩子。农村中确有困难的夫妇间隔几年以后可以生育第二个孩子。少数民族也要实行计划生育，具体要求和做法由各自治区或所在省决定。计划生育政策在城乡之间、汉族和少数民族之间要求有所差别，即农村宽于城市，少数民族宽于汉族。各省(区、市)根据国家的政策，结合本地区的实际情况，制定相应的政策规定，并通过法律程序，形成地方性法规。
A family planning policy that conforms to the state's actual conditions and embodies classified guidance is an important component part of exercising state guidance. The main contents of the current family planning policy in China are: Advocating delayed marriage and delayed child bearing, fewer and healthier births; and advocating one child for one couple. Some rural couples with actual difficulties are allowed to give birth to a second child a few years after the birth of the first child. The national minorities are also required to practise family planning, and concrete demands and approaches to the policy are decided by each autonomous region or the province in which the national minorities live. There are practical differences in the family planning policy between urban and rural areas, and between the Han and the ethnic minorities, i.e., the policy for rural areas is more flexible than for urban areas; for national minorities more flexible than for the Han people. Each province (autonomous region or municipality) will formulate the corresponding policy and regulations in accordance with the state's policy and the actual local conditions and form its local legislation through legal procedures.
　　提倡一对夫妇生育一个孩子，是中国在特定的历史条件下为了缓解严峻的人口形势而作出的必要抉择。提倡一对夫妇生育一个孩子，决不意味着实行“一孩化”，而是在鼓励夫妇生育一个孩子的同时，有计划地安排确有困难的、要求生育第二个孩子的夫妇生育第二个孩子。在计划生育起步较早的中国城镇，由于经济、文化、教育、卫生和社会保障等各方面的条件相对较好，因此，人们比较乐于接受小家庭模式，绝大多数育龄夫妇都响应政府的号召，自愿只生育一个孩子。1990年，全国城镇非农业人口的妇女总和生育率已降到1.26，比全国平均水平低1.05。农村妇女总和生育率为2.8。
One child for one couple is a necessary choice made under China's special historical conditions to alleviate the grim population situation. One child for one couple does not mean to "have one child" under all circumstances, but rather, while encouraging couples to have only one child, to plan arrangements for couples who have real difficulties and need to have a second child to do so. In China's cities and towns where family planning was introduced earlier and the economic, cultural, educational, public health and social security conditions are better, the overwhelming majority of couples of child-bearing age who are pleased with a small family have responded to the government's call and volunteered to have only one child. In 1990, of the non-agricultural population in China's urban localities, the total fertility rate of women dropped to 1.26, or 1.05 lower than the nation's average figure. In the countryside, the total fertility birth rate of women was 2.8.
　　中国是一个多民族的国家，少数民族人口约占全国总人口的8%。为了提高少数民族地区的经济文化水平和人口素质，从八十年代初开始，除西藏和人口稀少的民族地区外，中国政府在少数民族地区也提倡计划生育，具体政策由民族自治地区和有关省、自治区根据当地实际情况决定。一般是在农牧民中提倡一对夫妇生育两个孩子，对部分确有困难的农、牧民还可以放宽。建国以来，少数民族的人口增长速度不仅高于解放前，而且高于同期汉族的人口增长速度，总人口由1953年的3500万增加到1990年的9132万。在少数民族地区提倡实行计划生育以后，从1982年至1990年，少数民族人口增长了35.81%，比同期汉族人口增长水平高2.27倍。
China is a multi-ethnic country, the population of the national minorities making up about 8 percent of the country's total. To raise the economic and educational levels of the national minority areas and improve the life quality of the population, since the early 1980s the Chinese government has also advocated family planning in the areas inhabited by national minorities, except for Tibet and sparsely populated minority areas. The concrete policies are worked out by the national minority autonomous areas and the relevant provinces and autonomous regions according to specific local conditions. In general, a couple in agricultural and pastoral areas is allowed to have two children; and a more flexible policy is adopted to farmers and herdsmen with actual difficulties. Since the founding of New China, the population growth rate of the national minorities has been not only higher than that before Liberation, but also higher than that of the Han people in the corresponding period. The total population of the national minorities increased from 35 million in 1953 to 91.32 million in 1990. Between 1982 and 1990 after the practice of family planning in the areas inhabited by minority people, the population of the national minorities increased by 35.81 percent, or 3.27 times the growth of the Han population in the same period.
　　国家对西藏地区没有提出计划生育的具体要求。1985年，西藏自治区人民政府根据西藏人口发展的实际情况，开始在藏族干部、职工中提倡计划生育，鼓励一对夫妇自愿有间隔地生育两个孩子。而在广大农、牧民群众中主要是开展生育知识的宣传教育，提倡优生优育，改善妇幼保健条件，为自愿节育者提供避孕药具和节育技术服务；对农、牧民生育子女人数，政策上从未作过任何限制。据1990年第四次全国人口普查，西藏自治区的藏族人口为209.67万，占西藏总人口的95.48%。
The state has imposed no specific requirements on Tibet in family planning. In 1985, the People's Government of the Tibet Autonomous Region, in view of the actual population growth there, began to advocate family planning among Tibetan cadres, workers and staff, encouraging each couple to voluntarily space two births at reasonable intervals. Among the broad masses of farmers and herdsmen, the government has mainly educated them in child-bearing knowledge, advocated healthier birth and child-rearing practices, improved health care for women and children, and provided contraceptives and birth control technical services to those who volunteer to practise birth control. No policy restrictions have ever been imposed on the number of births in the agricultural and pastoral areas. The fourth national population census in 1990 revealed that Tibetan people in the Tibet Autonomous Region numbered 2.0967 million, making up 95.48 percent of the total population in Tibet.
　　中国鼓励有生育能力的已婚夫妇在国家指导下自愿选择适宜的避孕措施和方法；对自愿只生育一个孩子的家庭在生活、生产等许多方面给予优惠，帮助他们解决生活、生产中的困难，创造条件使他们尽快致富。对多生育子女的家庭，则征收一定数额的社会抚养费，这样做既是对多生育子女行为的限制，也是多生育子女者给予社会的一种补偿。征收社会抚养费根据地方性法规的规定进行。征收的数额不得影响被征收家庭的基本生活和维持生产经营的需要。所征收的费用用于计划生育事业。
China encourages fertile married couples to select contraceptive methods of their own accord under the guidance of the state; and offers various preferential treatments in daily life, work and many other aspects to families who volunteer to have only one child, helps them to solve difficulties in their lives and work and creates conditions for them to become better off as soon as possible. Assessments are imposed on multi-birth families to enable society to bring up their children. This represents both a restriction on having too many childbirths and an obligation of those responsible to pay a certain compensation to society. Assessments for this purpose are made according to local legislation, but the amounts thus collected must in no way affect the family's basic livelihood and their needs in keeping up production and management. All funds so collected will be used to further family planning.
　　实践证明，中国现行的计划生育政策符合全国人民的根本利益，同时也注意照顾部分群众的意愿的接受能力，因此，得到了全国人民的理解和支持，保证了计划生育工作的顺利开展并取得成功。
Practice has proved that China's current policy on family planning conforms to the fundamental interests of the people throughout the country; meanwhile it also takes into account part of the people's wishes and attitudes. Hence the policy has won understanding and support from the people of the whole country and has guaranteed the success of the family planning work.
赢得人民的共识
 Bringing the People to a Common Level of Understanding
　　中国在长期历史中形成的传统生育观念，至今对人们的生育行为仍有着深刻的影响，特别是在农村中不少群众的生育观念和意愿与国家控制人口增长的要求之间还存在着一定的距离。没有人民的觉悟，计划生育很难实施。为此，中国政府高度重视开展宣传教育，启发群众实行计划生育的自觉性，并积极创造有利于人们生育观念转变的经济文化条件。
The traditional child-bearing viewpoints formed in long years of Chinese history still profoundly affect people's attitudes to child-bearing; in particular a certain distance still exists between the viewpoints and will of a number of rural people and the state's demands for controlling population growth. Without the people's awareness, family planning can hardly be practised. Therefore, the Chinese government attaches great importance to educating the people to practise family planning of their own free will and strives to create the economic and cultural conditions for people to change their child-bearing viewpoints.
　　中国结合国情和人口形势进行的计划生育宣传教育，唤起了全社会对控制人口过快增长的紧迫感和责任感。八十年代开始，中国各地普遍开展“算账对比”活动，组织群众对全国和本地区建国以来人口增长与人均耕地、人均粮食、人均收入以及教育、就业、住房、交通等方面的变化，多子女家庭与子女较少的家庭在生活等方面的差别，以及实行计划生育给国家和人民带来的好处，进行算账对比，对于帮助群众认清国情，自觉实行计划生育起到了积极的促进作用。　
The publicity and education of family planning conducted in China according to its actual conditions and the population situation have made the whole society see that to control the rapid population growth is its responsibility and its urgent task. From the 1980s, all regions of China began one after another the activity of "doing accounts and making contrasts," during which people were organized to do accounts and make contrasts of the national and local changes after the founding of New China in terms of the population growth, per-capita cultivated land, grain supply and income, education, employment, housing and transportation, the differences in living standards between the families with more children and those with fewer children, and the benefits of family planning to the state and people. The activity has played an active role in helping people see clearly the nation's actual situation and practise family planning of their own accord.
　　从1987年开始，中国实施了以农村为重点的普及人口与计划生育基础知识教育的计划。目前，中国不少乡村和街道，都建立了人口学校或婚育学校。不同年龄和婚育状况的育龄人群，可以在这些学校里，通过医生、教师和干部的授课或咨询，在人口常识及生殖生理、避孕节育，妇幼保健等方面学得许多科学知识，从而更加自觉地实行计划生育。例如，地处辽宁省北部山区、农业人口占80%的铁岭市，1987年到1991年，70多万对育龄夫妇中有95%接受了教育。原来这个市每年出生人口中，早婚早育占10%左右，因近亲结婚、遗传病、地方病等导致的出生缺陷率达15‰左右。实施教育后的1991年，早婚早育降到1%以下，出生缺陷率降到8‰以下。全市92%的育龄夫妇都主动采取了避孕措施。
Since 1987, China has put into practice the plan on popularizing the basic knowledge of population and family planning, with the rural areas as the key points. At present, a number of villages and neighbourhoods have set up population or marriage education schools. The people at different childbearing ages and those in different situations may obtain scientific knowledge of population, childbirth, contraception and birth control, maternity and child care through the lectures or advice given by doctors, teachers and cadres. Then they may practise family planning more conscientiously. For instance, in Tieling City located in the northern mountain areas of Liaoning Province, whose agricultural population makes up 80 percent of the total, more than 700,000, or 95 percent, of the couples of child-bearing age received education from 1987 to 1991. In the past, of the city's annual newly born babies, about 10 percent were born to parents who married early and had children early; and the rate of births with genetic defects reached nearly 15 per thousand because of the marriage between close relatives, or hereditary and endemic diseases. After education, the percentage of the people who married early and had children early dropped to below 1 percent and the birth defect rate, to below 8 per thousand in 1991. Now 92 percent of the couples of child-bearing age in the city have adopted birth control measures of their own accord.
　　各级干部带头实行计划生育，在全体人民中形成了极大的影响力。例如，江苏省如东县的5万多名干部、党员，人人都能模范地执行国家的计划生育政策。在他们的影响下，广大群众也积极响应政府的号召，自觉实行计划生育。
Cadres at all levels taking the lead in practising family planning has exerted great influences among the people all over the country. For instance, each of over 50,000 cadres and Party members in Rudong County, Jiangsu Province has exemplarily implemented the state's family planning policy. Under their influence, the broad masses of the people actively respond to the government's call and practise family planning of their own free will.
　　活跃于各地的计划生育协会在宣传教育中发挥了重要作用。计划生育协会是由热心于计划生育的各界人士组成的具有广泛社会基础的群众团体。到目前到止，全国30个省、自治区、直辖市和绝大多数市、县及基层，都建立了计划生育协会，共有各级协会组织100多万个，会员约8000万名。会员与广大的育龄群众保持着密切的联系，全国正在逐步形成一种以群众自我教育、自我管理为主的计划生育工作局面。
The activities of family planning associations in all areas have also played an important role in publicity and education. Consisting of people from all walks of life who are interested in family planning, these associations are mass organizations with an extensive social basis. Up to now, all 30 provinces, autonomous regions and centrally administered municipalities as well as the overwhelming majority of the cities, counties and grass-roots units have set up their family planning associations, totalling more than one million with approximately 80 million members. Their members keep in close touch with the broad masses of the couples of child-bearing age. A family planning work situation with self-education and self-management as the mainstay is being formed step by step.
　　中国除利用报刊、广播、电视、出版、戏剧、音乐、曲艺以及各种学校进行宣传教育外，还专门建立了遍及全国城乡的计划生育宣传教育网络。到八十年代后期，除西藏自治区外，全国各省、自治区、直辖市和计划单列市陆续建立了地区性的计划生育宣传教育中心。这些计划生育宣传教育中心共制作有关的电视、录像片1600多部。其它各种形式宣传品不计其数。到1994年，全国计划生育系统已建立2所计划生育管理干部学院、8所中等专业学校及26所省级培训中心。各市、县、乡普遍设立了含有宣传教育功能的计划生育服务站，居民、村民委员会均有计划生育宣传员。
China makes full use of newspapers, radio, television, publication, theatre, music, local performances and schools to educate people about family planning. In addition, it has also set up a family planning publicity and education network reaching all parts of the country. In the late 1980s, all provinces, autonomous regions and centrally administered municipalities and the cities with economic planning directly supervised by the State Council (except Tibet Autonomous Region) set up regional family planning publicity and education centres one after another, which produced more than 1,600 television programmes and video tapes, and numerous publicity materials of various kinds. By 1994, two administrative officials' colleges, eight secondary professional schools and 26 provincial training centres had been founded as part of the national family planning system. Each city, county and township has a family planning service station focused on publicity and education; and all residents' and villagers' committees have a member responsible for propagating birth control education. 
　　中国高等学校、研究机构积极参加了人口与计划生育的培训和研究。中国人口学会、中国人口文化促进会等社团也在组织人口学者、文艺工作者和各界人士参与人口与计划生育工作方面发挥了积极的作用。
Educational institutions of higher learning and research institutes in China also take an active part in training and research in population and birth control. The China Population Society, the China Population Culture Promotion Society and other organizations have also played an active role in organizing demographers, literary and art workers and people from all walks of life to participate in family planning work.
　　通过宣传教育，赢得亿万民众的共识和自觉参与，是中国成功实行计划生育的根本保证。
Publicity and education, which has resulted in the common understanding and conscientious participation of hundreds of millions of people, is the fundamental guarantee of the successful implementation of family planning in China.
满足育龄群众生殖保健的需要
 Satisfying the Reproductive Health Needs of People of Child-bearing Age
　　中国实行计划生育坚持以避孕为主。为广大育龄群众提供计划生育的信息、咨询和服务，是中国实行计划生育的重要措施。政府十分重视依靠科技进步，研究开发计划生育、避孕节育的技术和方法，以满足育龄群众多方面、多层次的需求。政府还在全国普遍建立了计划生育、妇幼保健服务网络，向广大育龄群众及时提供安全、有效、方便的计划生育、生殖保健等方面的服务，保证了计划生育事业的开展。
While advocating family planning, China has mainly focused on contraception. Providing family planning information, consultation and services is an important measure in promoting family planning. The Chinese government attaches great importance to meeting the various and multi-level needs of people of child-bearing age by relying on progress in science and technology, and the study and development of the methods of family planning and contraception. In addition, the government has also established family planning and maternity and child care service networks throughout the country to provide people of child-bearing age with safe, effective and convenient services of family planning and reproductive health care, thus ensuring the smooth expansion of family planning.
　　中国早在六十年代就开展了避孕节育的科学研究工作，取得了大量成果并在全国普遍推广。八十年代以来，中国制定了计划生育科技发展规划，现已初步形成了布局较为合理的计划生育科研和避孕药具生产体系。中国已经有了一个种类比较齐全，方法多样，可供群众自由选择的避孕节育技术系列。中国的男性节育技术研究已处于世界领先地位，有的已被世界志愿手术节育协会列为推广技术。女性节育技术研究取得了不少重要的研究成果，有的已在国内外广泛应用。中国避孕药的研制已进入国际先进行列。在提高现有避孕药具质量的同时，中国抓紧研制新的更为安全、高效、简便、经济的避孕药具。为了满足广大育龄群众对避孕药具的需求，国家每年投资近2亿元，组织40多家工厂生产各种避孕药具。中国的避孕药具供应已基本做到了自给。
Back in the 1960s, China embarked on scientific research on contraception, and soon made a large number of achievements, which were popularized all over the country. In the 1980s, China formulated the programme for the scientific and technological development of family planning, and has formed an initial, geographically rationally distributed system for family planning scientific research and the production of contraceptives. China has produced contraceptive and birth control technological services providing a great variety of methods for people to select as they wish. China leads the world in the research on male contraception techniques, some of which have been listed as the ones to be promoted by the World Association of Voluntary Surgical Contraception (AVSC). China has also made quite a number of important achievements in research of female contraception techniques, some of which have been extensively used in China and abroad. China has been included among those advanced countries in the development of contraceptives. While improving the quality of existing contraceptives, China is sparing no effort to develop safer, more effective, more convenient and cheaper contraceptives. To meet the demands of people of child-bearing age for contraceptives, the state has organized more than 40 factories and invested nearly 200 million yuan in the production of various contraceptives every year. Now the production of contraceptives in China has basically become self-sufficient.
　　为了保证广大育龄群众随时随地能够得到所需要的服务，中国建立了遍及全国城乡的由医院、妇幼保健站和计划生育服务站组成的计划生育服务网络。计划生育工作人员坚持面向基层、深入农村、服务上门、方便群众的原则，向育龄群众提供指导、咨询和服务，帮助他们根据自己的健康状况和需要，选择适宜的避孕节育方法。根据中国农村的实际情况，提倡生了一个孩子的育龄妇女采用宫内节育器，生了两个孩子的育龄夫妇一方做绝育手术，有利于保护妇女的身心健康，是安全、有效的避孕措施，因此，比较容易为农村育龄夫妇所接受。对于不适宜或不愿意采取这种措施的育龄夫妇，则指导他们根据自身情况选择其它适合的避孕方法。目前，全国约有2亿育龄夫妇采取了避孕措施，全国已婚育龄夫妇避孕率已达到80%左右。
To ensure that people of child-bearing age can receive required services at any time and in any place, China has established countrywide family planning service networks consisting of hospitals, maternity and child care centres and family planning service stations. Following the principle of catering to grass-roots units, going deep into the countryside, offering services to people's doorsteps and providing conveniences to the people, family planning workers provide people of child-bearing age with guidance, advice and services, and help them select favourable contraceptive methods according to their health and needs. In light of the actual conditions in rural areas, women of child-bearing age there with one child are encouraged to use intrauterine device and either the wife or husband of a couple with two children is encouraged to undergo sterilization, which are safe and effective contraceptive measures favourable to the protection of women's health. Therefore they are more easily accepted by rural couples of child-bearing age. As to those couples who are unsuitable or unwilling to accept such measures, family planning workers guide them to select other contraceptive measures according to their needs. At present, more than 200 million married couples of child-bearing age in China have adopted contraceptive measures, making up about 80 percent of the country's total.
　　从六十年代开始，中国一直实行避孕药具免费发放和节育技术服务减免收费的政策。1988年，中国开始实行避孕药具免费发放与市场零售相结合的体制，拓宽了供应渠道，既方便和满足了群众的需要，又提高了避孕药具的使用效率。为了使群众能够及时得到避孕药具，从省、市到乡、村各级都有专门的机构或专人负责。
Starting from the 1960s, China distributed contraceptives free of charge, and exempted and reduced the fees for birth control technical services. Since 1988, China has implemented the system of combining the supply of free contraceptives with retail sales in the market, thus widening the supply channels, providing conveniences to the people, satisfying their needs and raising the utilization rate of contraceptives. To ensure that people can get contraceptives in time, specialized organs have been set up or special personnel assigned for this purpose from the provincial and city down to the township and village levels.
　　中国政府反对将人工流产作为计划生育的手段加以提倡。国家允许需要人工流产妇女在安全、可靠的条件下做手术。随着计划生育科学知识的普及和避孕节育措施的广泛采用，很多地方的人工流产数呈下降趋势。中国在出生率大幅度下降的情况下，每年出生人口数与人工流产数之比保持在1：0.3左右，相当于目前世界各国的中等水平。
The Chinese government is against promoting induced abortion as a means of family planning. China allows women who require induced abortion to have such an operation under safe and reliable conditions. Along with the popularization of the scientific knowledge of family planning and the extensive adoption of contraceptive measures, the number of induced abortions has been on the decline in many places. When China's birth rate drops sharply, the annual ratio between the number of newly born babies and that of induced abortions has retained at around 1:0.3, equivalent to the medium level in the world.

为了保障母婴的健康，中国在做好计划生育工作的同时，努力改善医疗卫生条件，加强妇幼保健服务，提高了广大妇女和儿童的健康水平，这对计划生育起到了促进作用。
To guarantee the health of babies and mothers, China has made efforts to improve medical and health care conditions and strengthen health care services for women and children while doing a job in family planning. Consequently, the improvement of women's and children's health has also promoted family planning. 

中国已建成遍及全国城乡的妇幼保健服务网络。数千个妇幼保健机构广泛开展妇女病普查防治、遗传咨询、婚前检查、孕产期保健、新法接生、婴幼儿保健等多种服务。中国许多地区的计划生育部门为育龄夫妇开展了婚育系列保健服务活动。一些经济落后地区虽然医疗卫生条件还比较差，但由于卫生和计划生育部门组织服务人员主动上门为群众服务，保护了妇女和儿童的健康，深受群众的欢迎。
China has set up health care networks for women and children all over the country. Several thousand maternity and child care centres provide various services, including the general survey, prevention and treatment of women's diseases, consultation on hereditary diseases, examination before marriage, health care for pregnant and postpartum women, new delivery methods, health care for babies and young children, etc. The family planning departments in many places have initiated health-care-at-childbirth services for couples of child-bearing age. In spite of their comparatively backward medical and health care conditions, the health care and family planning departments in some economically underdeveloped regions have organized people to provide services to the people at their doorsteps to protect women and children's health, so that they are highly acclaimed by the people.
在改革和发展中走向完善
 Optimization Through Reform and Development 
　　实践证明，中国实施的人口和计划生育方案取得了成功。但也要清醒地看到，目前各地区的计划生育工作发展不平衡，许多地区的生育水平还不稳定，部分地区的人口出生率还比较高；大多数农村地区特别是在一些经济不发达地区，计划生育工作方法和服务水平还有待改进和提高。在建立社会主义市场经济体制的过程中，计划生育工作又面临一些新情况和新问题。在人口素质、人口结构方面也存在一些不可忽视的问题。例如出生人口性别比偏高、人口老龄化等。因此中国在人口与发展问题上，仍然面临着严峻的挑战。实行计划生育，控制人口数量、提高人口素质仍然是一项艰巨而紧迫的战略任务。
Practice has shown that China's population and family planning programme has been crowned with success. But we should also clearly see that there is still imbalance in development in various areas, instability in fertility levels in many regions, and the high birth rate in others. The working style and service level concerning family planning in most rural regions, especially in some economically underdeveloped areas, remain to be improved. In the process of establishing the socialist market economic system, family planning work is faced with new situations and new problems. There are also problems in the quality and structure of population that should not be neglected. These problems include the high sex ratio and the growing population aging. Therefore, China is still confronted with a severe challenge on issues of population and development. To carry out family planning and population control, and improve population quality remain an arduous and urgent task of strategic significance.
　　以建立社会主义市场经济体制为目标的改革，有力地促进了社会生产力的发展，同时也为计划生育工作走向完善创造了有利的社会经济条件。中国政府将继续坚定不移地贯彻执行计划生育这一基本国策，促进人口与经济、社会、资源、环境协调发展。一方面对适合中国国情，实践证明行之有效的基本经验要坚持并不断地加以完善；另一方面在适应新的形势，解放思想，实事求是，不断深化改革，努力提高计划生育工作的水平。必须坚决改变某些地方主要依靠行政手段、突击活动来推行计划生育的做法，坚持以宣传教育为主、避孕为主、经常工作为主，为广大育龄群众提供计划生育优质服务，特别是要为广大妇女提供生殖保健服务，保护妇女的身心健康。要把计划生育的宣传教育和管理寓于为群众提供生产、生活和生育服务之中。为此，中国政府在1995年底制订了《中国计划生育工作纲要(1995—2000年)》，对计划生育工作深入发展的任务、目标和原则、措施提出了明确的要求。
The reform targeted at establishing a socialist market economic system is further promoting the development of social productive forces. At the same time, it has created favourable social and economic conditions for optimizing the family planning work. The Chinese government will unswervingly continue to carry out the basic national policy of family planning, and promote a coordinated development between population on one hand and the economy, society, resources and environment on the other. On one hand, we will adhere to and continually improve the basic experience that suits China's specific conditions and that has proved effective in practice; on the other, we should adapt ourselves to the new situation, emancipate the mind, seek truth from facts and unceasingly deepen the reform, to improve the level of family planning work. The practice of pursuing family planning mainly through administrative means and campaigns in some areas must be resolutely changed. The emphasis should be put on the publicity and education, contraception and regular work. Quality service in family planning should be provided to the people of child-bearing age, particularly the reproductive health care for women, to protect their health. The publicity and education and the management of family planning programme should serve the purpose of serving people's production, livelihood and fertility. With this in mind, the "Programme of China's Family Planning Work (1995-2000)" was formulated by the Chinese government at the end of 1994, setting clear demands on the task, target, principle and measures in deepening the development of family planning work.
　　中国政府认为，人口问题从根本上讲是一个发展问题。人口与经济、社会发展密不可分。因此，中国坚持把人口与计划生育工作作为国家经济、社会持续发展战略的一个重要组成部分，与经济、社会问题一同规划和组织实施。
The Chinese government holds that the issue of population is fundamentally one of development. Population is closely and inseparably related to economic and social development. Therefore, China always considers population and family planning an important component part of the strategy for the substained national economic and social development, and they are planned and implemented together with economic and social issues.
　　中国实行改革开放以来，国民经济和科技、教育、卫生、社会福利事业和发展，对人们生育观念的转变和生育率的下降起了积极的促进作用。在一些经济发展较快的地区，这种作用更加明显。经济发展与人口控制相互促进，使这些地区在较短时间内实现了向低出生、低死亡、低自然增长的现代人口再生产类型的转变。在经济发展相对落后的贫困地区，八十年代以来，中国政府制定了人口、粮食、生态、资源全面规划、综合治理、协调发展的总体战略，开展了大规模的扶贫开发活动，并把扶贫开发与计划生育结合起来，有力地促进了这些地区的经济、社会发展。
Since China's reform and opening to the outside world, the development of national economy, science, technology, education, public health and social welfare has played an active and promotive role in changing people's concept of fertility and in lowering the birth rate. This role is particularly evident in areas where the economy has developed rapidly. As economic development and population control promote each other, these areas have seen a transition, in a relatively short period of time, to the modern population reproduction pattern characterized by a low birth rate, low death rate and low natural growth rate. As for poverty-stricken areas where the economy is relatively backward, since the 1980s, the Chinese government has formulated a comprehensive strategy in regard to the overall planning, comprehensive management and coordinated development in population, grain, ecology and resources. It has carried out extensive activities to help the poor in their development and integrated these activities with family planning, vigorously accelerating the economic and social development in these areas.
　　近年来，中国政府在总结历史经验和群众创造的基础上，提出在广大农村要把计划生育工作与发展经济、帮助农民勤劳致富奔小康、建设文明幸福的家庭结合起来，通过为农民群众提供生产、生活、生育方面的服务，首先帮助实行计划生育的家庭尽快致富，并带动更多的家庭少生、快富、奔小康。这种做法得到了各级政府、基层干部和广大群众的热情支持和衷心拥护。在较短的时间内，全国大多数省、区、市都逐步开展了这项工作。这样做不仅有利于促进农村经济的发展，增加农民的收入，提高农民的生活水平，而且有助于农民从切身利益中感受到少生孩子的好处，逐步转变生育观念，提高实行计划生育的自觉性和积极性。农村妇女不仅是这项活动的积极的参与者，也是主要的受益者。她们的生产力进一步得到了解放，劳动收入增加，家庭地位和社会地位得到提高，在婚姻生育方面也获得了更多的自主权。
On the basis of summing up experiences of history and the innovations of the people, the Chinese government in recent years has put forward that the rural areas should combine family planning with developing economy, helping peasants to become better off through hard work, and building progressive and happy families. Through providing service to peasants in production, livelihood and fertility, and above all through helping families practising family planning to become better off, more and more families were guided to have less children and to improve their financial situation as soon as possible. This practice has won warm support from governments at all levels, cadres at grass-roots level and the people. In a relatively short period of time, this work has been implemented in most of the provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities throughout the country. This is not only good for accelerating rural economic development, increasing peasants' income, and improving their living standard, but it can also make them realize from their immediate interests the benefit of having less children, gradually changing their attitudes towards fertility, hightening their awareness of and enthusiasm for carrying out family planning. Rural women not only take an active part in these activities but they also benefit mostly from them. Through these activities, they have enhanced their enthusiasm for production, increased their income from labour, improved their status in both the family and society and obtained greater independence in marriage and childbirth.
　　为了从根本上全面解决中国的人口问题，必须采取综合措施，包括大力发展经济，消除贫困，保护生态环境，合理开发利用资源，普及文化教育，发展医疗卫生和妇幼保健事业，完善社会保障制度，特别是养老保险制度，稳步推进城市化的进程，提高妇女地位、保障妇女的合法权益等。近年来，中国政府在这些方面都制定了规划、政策和措施，为实行计划生育创造了更加有利的条件和环境。
In order to fundamentally and comprehensively solve China's population problem, comprehensive measures have to be adopted. Such measures include vigorously developing the economy, getting rid of poverty, protecting the ecological environment, rationally developing and utilizing resources, popularizing education, developing medical service and maternal and child health care, improving the social security system --especially the insurance system for the aged, steadily advancing urbanization, improving women's status, and guaranteeing the legal rights and interests of women. Over the past few years, the Chinese government has formulated plans, policies and measures in these fields, providing a more favourable environment for the implementation of family planning.
　　对于近年来出现的出生性别比升高的趋势，中国政府和全社会都十分重视，正在采取加强宣传教育、保障妇女儿童合法权益、严禁在医学需要之外采用技术性对胎儿性别鉴定和选择性人工流产，以及完善出生申报和统计制度等措施，逐步加以解决。
The Chinese government and the society as a whole have paid close attention to the recent tendency of the high sex ratio. The problem will be gradually solved through heightened publicity and education, and measures have been taken to guarantee the legal rights and interests of women and children; to severely prohibit, except when called for medically, the technical examination of fetus for determining sex followed by selective abortion; and to improve birth report and statistical system.
　　中国政府坚信，中国的计划生育事业必将在改革和发展中不断解决前进中出现的问题，逐步走向完善。
The Chinese government strongly believes that the problems that have appeared in the course of implementing China's family planning programme will be solved steadily in the process of reform and development, before it can be gradually improved and perfected.
保障人权的正确选择
 The Correct Choice for Human Rights Protection
　　中国政府在推行计划生育的实践中，既坚持从本国的实际情况出发，又充分考虑和遵守国际机构和组织制定的有关人口、计划生育的原则及各项规定，逐步确立了反映人民的根本利益和各项权益的方针、政策及措施、方法，并使之随着实际情况的变化不断完善，从而更好地维护中华民族的生存权和发展权。
In the practice of carrying out family planning programme, whilst persistently proceeding from its reality and taking into full account and observing principles and regulations concerning population and family planning formulated by international institutions and organizations, the Chinese government has gradually set up guiding principles, policies, measures and methods that reflect the basic interests and various rights and interests of the people, and has continuously improved these as the actual situations change, so as to better safeguard the right to subsistence and development of the Chinese nation.
　　在国际交往和合作中，充分尊重各国的主权，互不干涉内政，是中国一贯主张和坚持的原则立场。1994年开罗国际人口与发展大会通过的《国际人口与发展大会行动纲领》指出，“制定和实施与人口有关的政策是每个国家的责任，应考虑到一国的经济、社会、环境、条件的多样性，充分地尊重该国人民各种不同的宗教和道德观念、文化背景和哲学信仰，以及全世界人民对一个共同未来所担负的共同而又有区别的责任。”各国只有根据本国的实际情况，自主地确定其人口政策和人口目标以及实现这一目标的方案与措施，才能有效地解决各自的人口问题。解决人口问题的国际合作，也应在尊重各国主权的前提下，本着相互理解、求同存异的态度进行，才能取得积极的成果。由于各国的国情不同，社会经济发展的程度和模式各异、文化风俗和价值观念有别，又由于各国人口问题存在的程度或形式有所不同，各国在解决人口问题的方案和力度上也会存在各种差异，这完全是一种正常的现象。中国不但从来不把自己在解决人口问题上的做法和观点强加于人，而且一向理解并欢迎一向善意的批评和有益的建议。但是，有些人歪曲事实或不顾基本的事实，对中国的计划生育事业妄加评论，指责其“违反人权”、“不人道”，甚至把他们的价值观念强加于中国，以“保护人权”为借口向中国施加压力，干涉中国的内政，这是中国断然不能接受的。任何此类干涉中国内政的做法，既背离了国际社会在人口领域确立的基本原则，又违背了公认的国际法准则，都是无益于中国计划生育事业的健康发展和世界人口的稳定的。
It has been China's consistent stand and principle in international exchange and cooperation to fully respect the sovereignty of all nations, and not to interfere with the internal affairs of other nations. The "Programme of Action" adopted by the International Conference on Population and Development by that conference in Cairo, 1994, pointed out: "The formulation and implementation of population-related policies is the responsibility of each country and should take into account the economic, social and environmental diversity of conditions in each country, with full respect for the various religious and ethical values, cultural backgrounds and philosophical convictions of its people, as well as the shared but differentiated responsibilities of all the world's people for a common future." Only by proceeding from the reality of the country, independently setting up its population policy and target, as well as plans and measures to realize this target, can the population problem of each country be effectively solved. Positive results of solving population problem through international cooperation can only be achieved under the premise of respecting the sovereignty of each country, and by adopting the attitude of mutual understanding and the seeking of common ground while preserving differences. As the national situation, the degree and pattern of social and economic development, cultural habits and values, and the specific characteristics of the population problem in each country differ, there will be differences in the plan and dynamics of problem solving in each country, which is a normal phenomenon. Not only has China never imposed its ways and ideas of solving its own population problem on anyone else, but it has, instead, always understood and welcomed all good-intentioned criticism and useful suggestions from outside. However, some people, distorting or disregarding the basic facts, have made improper comments on China's family planning programme, criticizing it as a "violation of human rights," and denouncing it as "inhumane." They have even tried to impose their values and ideas on China, using the excuse of "protecting human rights" to put pressure on China and to interfere in China's internal affairs. This is totally unacceptable. Any such practice of interfering in China's internal affairs has not only deviated from the basic principle set up in the field of population by the international community, but it has also violated the established principles of international law, which will neither help promote a healthy development of China's family planning programme nor the stability of the world's population.
　　中国一向认为，人权概念是历史发展的产物，同一定的社会、政治、经济条件，同一个国家特定的历史、文化和观念密切相关。人权的实现与完善是一个历史的过程，作为公民各项权利之一的生育选择权也同样如此。
China has always held that concepts of human rights are a product of historical development, closely related to social, political and economic conditions, as well as the individual nation's particular history, culture and concepts. The realization and optimization of human rights is a historical process. A citizen's right of choice in reproduction is also part of this process.

二十世纪中叶世界人口形势发生重大变化，世界人口增长速度之快及其所带来的严重后果，日益引起国际社会和各国的关注。
The great changes in the world population situation in the mid-twentieth century, the rapid world population growth and the severe consequence ensuing have aroused increasing attention from the international community and various countries. 

特别是在人口增长过快的发展中国家，人口与生存、发展的矛盾尤为突出。
The contradiction between population on one hand and survival and development on the other is especially sharp in developing countries with a fast population growth. 
不合理的国际经济秩序、迟滞的经济和社会的发展，加上人口的压力，使一些发展中国家和地区与发达国家在人民福利和生活条件上的差距持续拉大，生活在贫困状态下的人数有增无减。
Irrational international economic order, stagnant economic and social development, and the pressure of a large population have continually widened the gap between developed and developing countries in terms of welfare and living conditions, increasing rather than decreasing the number of those living below the poverty line. 
在认识到人口问题的严重性和控制人口的紧迫性之后，人们对生育及其相关权利的理解和主张，也随着历史条件的变化而变得更加充分和全面。1974年布加勒斯特国际人口会议通过的《世界人口行动计划》提出，“个人的生殖行为同社会的需要和愿望应该相互协调”。在肯定“所有夫妇和个人都享有负责地自由决定其子女人数和生育间隔以及为达此目的而获得资料、教育与方法的基本人权”的同时，明确指出“夫妇和个人在行使这种权利时，应考虑他们现有的子女和将来的子女的需要，以及他们对社会的责任”。1984年墨西哥城国际人口会议通过的《进一步执行世界人口行动计划的建议》又强调指出，“任何对权利的承认同时也意味着责任”。夫妇和个人在行使生育选择权，“应认真考虑他们自己的情况以及他们的决定对其子女和他们所生活的社区和社会的平衡发展有何影响”。“各国政府可以作出较多的努力去帮助其人民以负责的态度作出有关生育的决定。”1994年开罗国际人口和发展大会通过的《国际人口与发展大会行动纲领》又一次强调，生殖权利“承认所有夫妇和个人均享有自由、负责地决定生育次数、生育间隔和时间，并获得这样做的信息和方法基本权利，以及实现性和生殖健康方面最高标准的权利。”并指出“在行使这种权利时，他们应考虑到他们已有的和将来的子女的需要以及他们对社会所负的责任。促进所有人负责任地行使这些权利应成为政府和社区支持的生殖健康包括计划生育方面政策和方案的基础。”
With recognition of the seriousness of the population problem and the urgent need to control population growth, people's understanding and attitudes towards reproduction and other associated rights have changed, responding to new historical conditions, becoming more comprehensive. The "World Population Plan of Action," approved at the International Population Conference held in Bucharest in 1974, states: "Individual reproductive behaviour and the needs and aspirations of society should be reconciled.... All couples and individuals have the basic right to decide freely and responsibly the number and spacing of their children and to have the information, education and means to do so; the responsibility of couples and individuals in the exercise of this right takes into account the needs of their living and future children, and their responsibilities towards the community." The "Recommendations on Further Implementing the World Population Plan of Action," approved at the 1984 International Population Conference held in Mexico City, again emphasized that "Any recognition of rights also implies responsibilities." Accordingly, when couples and individuals exercise their right to the choice of reproduction, they should "take into consideration their own situation, as well as the implications of their decisions or the balanced development of their children and of the community and society in which they live." The "Recommendations" point out that "governments can do more to assist people in making their reproductive decisions in a responsible way." The "Programme of Action" adopted at the International Conference on Population and Development held in Cairo in 1994 once again points out that "these [reproductive] rights rest on the recognition of the basic right of all couples and individuals to decide freely and responsibly the number, spacing and timing of their children and to have the information and means to do so, and the right to attain the highest standard of sexual and reproductive health.... In the exercise of this right, they should take into account the needs of their living and future children and their responsibilities towards the community. The promotion of the responsible exercise of these rights for all people should be the fundamental basis for government- and community-supported policies and programmes in the area of reproductive health, including family planning."
　　中国实行的计划生育，正是本着国际社会确定的有关原则和人权要求进行的。中国的计划生育政策的方案，体现了公民权利和义务的统一、个人利益和社会利益的统一。这既与历次国际人口会议确定的基本原则相吻合，又建立在社会主义条件下人们之间利益关系的基础之上。在任何国家，权利和义务从来都不是绝对的，而是相对而言的。没有离开权利的义务，也没有离开义务的权利。在社会的要求和个人的利益之间有冲突时，以某种方式来加以调解，这是各主权国家的政府都在做的事情。由于中国人口规模大，中国政府必须对公民的生育数量有所限制。对每一个公民来说，这是应尽的义务，因为这是为了全社会全民族共同的富强，而不是为了谁的私利。这是完全正当的，完全符合中国社会的道德观念。脱离实际，抽象地、绝对地来谈论公民权利和义务，不仅在中国站不住脚，在任何国家都是站不住脚的。在中国这样一个人口众多的发展中国家，如果片面强调夫妇和个人的生育自由，而不同时确立人们在生育问题上对家庭、子女和社会利益应负的责任，只能导致盲目生育，人口无限膨胀，绝大多数人包括新生婴儿利益都会受到严重损害。
Family planning in China is pursued in complete accordance with the relevant principles and human rights requirements designated by the international community. China's family planning policies and programmes combine citizens' rights and duties, joining the interests of the individual with those of society. These conform to the basic principles outlined at the various international population conferences and have been established on the basis of the relationship of interpersonal interests under socialism. Never in any country are rights and duties absolute, but rather, they are relative. There are no duties apart from rights, or rights apart from duties. When there is conflict between social needs and individual interests, a means has to be sought to mediate it. This is something that the government of every sovereign country is doing. As China has a large population, the Chinese government has to limit the number of births of its citizens. This is a duty incumbent on each citizen as it serves the purpose of making the whole society and whole nation prosperous, and it is not proceeding from the private interest of some individuals. This is wholly justifiable and entirely consistent with the moral concepts of Chinese society. To talk about citizens' rights and duties out of reality in an abstract and absolute way does not hold water either in China or in any other country. In a heavily populated developing country like China, if the reproductive freedom of couples and individuals are unduly emphasized at the expense of their responsibilities to their families, children and societal interests in matters of child bearing, indiscriminate reproduction and unlimited population growth will inevitably ensue. The interests of the majority of the people, including those of new-born infants, will be seriously harmed.
　　应当看到，在中国尤其是在农村地区、落后地区和边远地区，一部分育龄夫妇的生育意愿同现行的计划生育政策要求有一定距离，在计划生育工作中也难免会有这样那样的缺点，但是，由于计划生育政策从根本上符合中国绝大多数人的利益，而且在实际执行过程中，注意照顾一部分群众的实际困难和正当要求，坚决维护公民的合法权益，因而计划生育政策得到了广大人民群众的理解和认同。通过长期的实践，中国人民从实际的利益中越来越感受到计划生育是一项利国利民的事业，越来越理解和支持这项事业。经过不懈的努力，包括吸取各国有益的经验，中国计划生育的管理水平和服务质量正在不断提高，实际工作中的缺点和问题也在明显减少。相信一切不抱偏见的人会尊重这个基本事实。
We should see that in China, especially in rural, backward and remote areas, there is a gap between the desire for childbirth of some couples of child-bearing age and the demand of the present family planning policy, and shortcomings of one kind or another are unavoidable in family planning work. However, as the family planning policy fundamentally conforms to the interests of the majority of the Chinese people and, during its actual implementation, the actual difficulties and reasonable demands of some people have been taken into consideration and the legal rights and interests of the citizens are strongly protected, the family planning policy has won understanding and recognition from the broad masses of the people. Through long period of practice, the Chinese people have realized more and more deeply from their practical interests that family planning is a cause that benefits the nation and the people, and they have increasingly come to understand and support this cause. After unremitting efforts, including drawing useful experience from other countries, the management level and service quality of China's family planning programme have continually been improved and the shortcomings and problems in its actual work has been remarkably reduced. We believe that all those who do not seek to hold prejudice will respect this basic fact.
结束语
Concluding Remarks
　　中国作为拥有世界五分之一以上人口的国家，深知自己在稳定全球人口中所肩负的责任和应该发挥的重要作用。实行计划生育，解决好中国的人口问题，不仅是对中国人民和子孙后代的幸福负责，也是对稳定全球人口应尽的义务。为了人类的共同利益，同时也是为了各国自身的利益，国际社会和各国应共同努力解决各国和世界的人口问题，以促进各国和整个人类社会的发展和进步。自1974年在布加勒斯特首次召开国际人口会议至今，已经历了21个春秋。国际社会和各国政府在执行《世界人口行动计划》和《墨西哥城宣言》方面取得了新的进展，世界人口增长速度有了进一步的下降。尽管如此，世界人口每年仍以约9000万的规模增长着，到本世界末世界人口将达到62.5亿，到2025年将达到84亿，控制世界人口的任务依然紧迫而艰巨。中国将一如既往地继续与世界各国协调行动，通力合作，为贯彻落实《国际人口与发展大会行动纲领》，稳定全球人口，为人类更加美好的未来作出积极的贡献。
China is home to more than one-fifth of the world's population. It thoroughly understands the responsibility it bears in stabilizing world population growth and the essential role it should play. Family planning as an effective solution to China's population problems is more than just responsibility towards the well-being of the Chinese people and future generations; it is a duty owed to maintaining the stability of the world population. Working for the common interests of all of humanity, at the same time working for individual interests of each nation, the international community and each nation should work together to solve the population problems facing individual nations and the entire world. This will promote development and progress in every country and throughout human society. Twenty-one years have passed since the First International Population Conference was held in Bucharest in 1974. The government of each nation and the international community as a whole have made new progress in implementing the "World Population Plan of Action" and the "Mexico City Declaration." The rate of increase in world population has been further slowed. Still, world population continues to increase by 90 million per annum, and it will reach 6.25 billion by the end of the century and 8.4 billion by 2025. Control of world population remains an urgent and difficult task. China, as always, will continue to work in concert with all the nations of the world to carry out the "Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development" and make positive contributions to stabilizing world population and ensuring a happier future for mankind.
中国的环境保护  
Environmental Protection in China  
中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China
一九九六年六月·北京
June 1996, Beijing 

目录
Contents
前言
Foreword 
实施可持续发展战略的选择
The Choice of Implementing a Sustainable Develop-ment Strategy
逐步完善的法律体系与管理体制
Improving the Legal and Administrative Systems Step by Step
工业污染防治和城市环境综合整治
The Prevention and Control of Industrial Pollution and the Comprehensive Improvement of the Urban Environment
国土整治与农村环境保护
Territorial Control and Rural Environmental Protec-tion
生态环境与生物多样性的保护
Protection of the Ecological Environment and Biodiv-ersity
环境科学技术和环境宣传教育
Environmental Science and Technology, and Envi-ronmental Publicity and Education

前 言
Foreword

中国是一个发展中国家，目前正面临着发展经济和保护环境的双重任务。
China is a developing country. Now it is confronted with the dual task of developing the economy and protecting the environment. 

从国情出发，中国在全面推进现代化建设的过程中，把环境保护作为一项基本国策，把实现可持续发展作为一个重大战略，在全国范围内开展了大规模的污染防治和生态环境保护。
Proceeding from its national conditions, China has, in the process of promoting its overall modernization program, made environmental protection one of its basic national policies, regarded the realization of sustainable development as an important strategy and carried out throughout the country large-scale measures for pollution prevention and control as well as ecological environment protection. 

改革开放１８年来，中国国民生产总值以年均１０％左右的速度持续增长，而环境质量基本避免了相应恶化的局面。
Over the 18 years since its adoption of reform and opening to the outside world, China's gross national product (GNP) has achieved a sustained annual growth of around 10 percent, while its environmental quality has basically steered clear of the outcome of corresponding deterioration. 
实践表明，中国实行的经济、社会和环境协调发展的方针是有成效的。
Practice has proved that the principle adopted by China of effecting coordinated development between the economy, the society and the environment has been effective.

作为国际社会的一名成员，中国在致力于保护本国环境的同时，积极参与国际环境事务，努力推进环境保护领域的国际合作，认真履行所承担的国际义务。所有这些，充分反映了中国政府和人民保护全球环境的诚意和决心。
As a member of the international community, China, while making great efforts to protect its own environment, has taken an active part in international environmental affairs, striven to promote international cooperation in the field of environmental protection, and earnestly fulfilled its international obligations. All these have given full expression to the sincerity and determination of the Chinese government and people to protect the global environment.
　　中国为保护环境作出了哪些努力？中国的环境保护状况如何？值此一年一度的“６·５”世界环境日之际，在这里作一介绍。
What efforts has China made to protect its own environment? What is the situation of environmental protection in China? On the occasion of the annual World Environment Day, which falls on June 5, here is a brief account:

实施可持续发展战略的选择

The Choice of Implementing a Sustainable Development Strategy

　　中国现代化建设是在人口基数大，人均资源少，经济发展和科学技术水平都比较落后的条件下进行的。７０年代以来，随着中国人口的增长、经济的发展和人民消费水平的不断提高，使本来就已经短缺的资源和脆弱的环境面临着越来越大的压力。选择一条什么样的发展道路，历史地成为与当代中国人民及其子孙后代生存息息相关的重大问题。

China's modernization drive has been launched in the following conditions: The country has a large population base, its per-capita average of natural resources is low, and its economic development as well as scientific and technological level remain quite backward. Along with the growth of China's population, the development of the economy and the continuous improvement of the people's consumption level since the 1970s, the pressure on resources, which were already in rather short supply, and on the fragile environment has become greater and greater. Which road of development to choose has turned out, historically, to be an issue of paramount importance to the survival of the Chinese people as well as their posterity.

　　中国政府十分重视因人口增长和经济发展而出现的环境问题，把保护环境作为提高人民生活水平和生活质量的一个重要方面。为了促进经济、社会与环境的协调发展，中国在８０年代制定并实施了一系列保护环境的方针、政策、法律和措施。

The Chinese government has paid great attention to the environmental issues arising from the country's population growth and economic development, and has made protecting the environment an important aspect of the improvement of the people's living standards and quality of life. In order to promote coordinated development between the economy, the society and the environment, China enacted and implemented a series of principles, policies, laws and measures for environmental protection in the 1980s.

　　确立环境保护为中国的一项基本国策。防治环境污染和生态破坏以及合理开发利用自然资源关系到国家的全局利益和长远发展，中国政府坚定不移地贯彻执行环境保护这项基本国策。

Making environmental protection one of China's basic national policies. The prevention and control of environmental pollution and ecological destruction and the rational exploitation and utilization of natural resources are of vital importance to the country's overall interests and long-term development. The Chinese government is unswervingly carrying out the basic national policy of environmental protection.

　　制定经济建设、城乡建设和环境建设同步规划、同步实施、同步发展，实现经济效益、社会效益、环境效益相统一的指导方针，实行“预防为主，防治结合”、“谁污染，谁治理”和“强化环境管理”三大政策。

Formulating the guiding principles of simultaneous planning, simultaneous implementation and simultaneous development for economic construction, urban and rural construction and environmental construction, and combining the economic returns with social effects and environmental benefits; and carrying out the three major policies of ``prevention first and combining prevention with control,'' ``making the causer of pollution responsible for treating it'' and ``intensifying environmental management.''

　　颁布实施环境保护的法律法规，把环境保护建立在法制的基础上，不断完善环境法律体系，严格执法程序，加大执法力度，保证环境法律法规的有效实施。

Promulgating and putting into effect laws and regulations regarding environmental protection and placing environmental protection on a legal footing, continuously improving the statutes concerning the environment, formulating strict law-enforcement procedures and increasing the intensity of law enforcement so as to ensure the effective implementation of the environmental laws and regulations.

　　坚持环境保护纳入国民经济和社会发展计划，实施国家指导下的宏观调控与管理，逐步增加对环境保护的投入，使环境保护与各项建设事业统筹兼顾，协调发展。

Persisting in incorporating environmental protection into the plans for national economic and social development, introducing to it macro regulation and management under state guidance, and gradually increasing environmental protection input so as to give simultaneous consideration to environmental protection and other undertakings and ensure their coordinated development.

　　建立健全各级政府的环境保护机构，形成比较完善的环境管理体制，充分发挥环境监督管理的作用。

Establishing and improving environmental protection organizations under governments at all levels, forming a rather complete environmental control system, and bringing into full play the governments' role in environmental supervision and administration.

　　加速环境科学技术的进步。加强基础理论研究，组织科技攻关，开发和推广防治环境污染的实用技术，扶植环境保护产业的发展，初步形成了环境保护科研体系。

Accelerating progress in environmental science and technology. Strengthening research into basic theories, organizing the tackling of key scientific and technological problems, developing and popularizing prac"itical technology for environmental pollution prevention and control, fostering the growth of environmental protection industries, and giving initial shape to an environmental protection scientific research system.

　　开展环境宣传教育，提高全民族的环境意识。广泛进行环境宣传，逐步普及中小学环境教育，发展环境保护在职教育和专业教育，培养环境科学技术和管理方面的专门人才。

Carrying out environmental publicity and education to enhance the whole nation's awareness of the environment. Widely conducting environmental publicity work, gradually popularizing environmental education in secondary and primary schools, developing on-the-job education in environ"imen tal protection and vocational education, and training specialized personnel in environmental science and technology as well as environmental administration.

　　推进环境保护领域的国际合作。积极发展同世界各国和国际组织在环境与发展方面的交流与合作，认真履行国际环境公约，努力发挥中国在国际环境事务中的作用。

Promoting international cooperation in the field of environmental protection. Actively expanding exchanges and cooperation concerning the environment and development with other countries and international organizations, earnestly implementing international environmental conventions, and seeking scope for China's role in global environmental affairs.

　　进入９０年代，国际社会与世界各国在探索解决环境与发展问题的道路上迈出了重要一步。１９９２年６月，联合国环境与发展大会把可持续发展作为未来共同的发展战略，得到了与会各国政府的普遍赞同。

Since the beginning of the 1990s the international community and various countries have made an important step forward in exploring solutions to problems of the environment and development. The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, held in June 1992, made sustainable development the strategy for common development in the future, and this won wide acclaim from the governments of all countries represented at the conference.

　　１９９２年８月，联合国环境与发展大会之后，中国政府提出了中国环境与发展应采取的十大对策，明确指出走可持续发展道路是当代中国以及未来的必然选择。

In August 1992, shortly after that conference, the Chinese government put forward ten major measures China was to adopt to enhance its environment and development, clearly pointing out that the road of sustainable development was a logical choice for China now and in the future.

　　１９９４年３月，中国政府批准发布了《中国２１世纪议程中国２１世纪人口、环境与发展白皮书》，从人口、环境与发展的具体国情出发，提出了中国可持续发展的总体战略、对策以及行动方案。有关部门和地方也分别制定了实施可持续发展战略的行动计划。

In March 1994 the Chinese government approved and promulgated China's Agenda 21 -- White Paper on China's Population, Environment, and Development in the 21st Century. This document, proceeding from the country's specific national conditions in these three respects, put forward China's overall strategy, measures and program of action for sustainable development. The various departments and localities also worked out their respective plans of action to implement the strategy for sustainable development.

　　１９９６年３月，第八届全国人民代表大会第四次会议审议通过的《中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发展“九五”计划和２０１０年远景目标纲要》，把实施可持续发展作为现代化建设的一项重大战略，使可持续发展战略在中国经济建设和社会发展过程中得以实施。

At its Fourth Session in March 1996 China's Eighth National People's Congress examined and adopted the Ninth Five-Year Plan of the People's Republic of China for National Economic and Social Development and the Outline of the Long-Term Target for the Year 2010. Both the Plan and Outline take sustainable development as an important strategy for modernization, thus making it possible for the implementation of the strategy of sustainable development in the course of China's economic construction and social development.

逐步完善的法律体系与管理体制

Improving the Legal and Administrative Systems Step by Step

　　中国重视环境法制建设，目前已经形成了以《中华人民共和国宪法》为基础，以《中华人民共和国环境保护法》为主体的环境法律体系。

China pays great attention to environmental legislative work and has now established an environmental statutory framework that takes the Constitution of the People's Republic of China as the foundation and the Environmental Protection Law of the People's Republic of China as the main body.

　　《中华人民共和国宪法》规定：“国家保护和改善生活环境和生态环境，防治污染和其他公害。”“国家保障自然资源的合理利用，保护珍贵的动物和植物。禁止任何组织或者个人用任何手段侵占或者破坏自然资源。”

The Constitution of the People's Republic of China stipulates, ``The state protects and improves the living environment and the ecological environment, and prevents and remedies pollution and other public hazards,'' and ``The state ensures the rational use of natural resources and protects rare animals and plants. The appropriation or damage of natural resources by any organization or individual by whatever means is prohib"iited.''

　　《中华人民共和国环境保护法》是中国环境保护的基本法。该法确立了经济建设、社会发展与环境保护协调发展的基本方针，规定了各级政府、一切单位和个人保护环境的权利和义务。

The Environmental Protection Law of the People's Republic of China is the cardinal law for environmental protection in China. The law has established the basic principle for coordinated development between economic construction, social progress and environmental protection, and defined the rights and duties of governments at all levels, all units and individuals as regards environmental protection.

　　中国针对特定的环境保护对象制定颁布了多项环境保护专门法以及与环境保护相关的资源法，包括：《水污染防治法》、《大气污染防治法》、《固体废物污染环境防治法》、《海洋环境保护法》、《森林法》、《草原法》、《渔业法》、《矿产资源法》、《土地管理法》、《水法》、《野生动物保护法》、《水土保持法》、《农业法》等。

China has enacted and promulgated many special laws on environmental protection as well as laws on natural resources related to environmental protection. They include the Law on the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution, Law on the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution, Law on the Prevention and Control of Environmental Pollution by Solid Wastes, Marine Environment Protection Law, Forestry Law, Grassland Law, Fisheries Law, Mineral Resources Law, Land Administration Law, Water Resources Law, Law on the Protection of Wild Animals, Law on Water and Soil Conservation, and Agriculture Law.

　　中国政府还制定了《噪声污染防治条例》、《自然保护区条例》、《放射性同位素与射线装置放射防护条例》、《化学危险品安全管理条例》、《淮河流域水污染防治暂行条例》、《海洋石油勘探开发环境保护管理条例》、《海洋倾废管理条例》、《陆生野生动物保护实施条例》、《风景名胜区管理暂行条例》、《基本农田保护条例》、《城市绿化条例》等３０多件环境保护行政法规。此外，各有关部门还发布了大量的环境保护行政规章。

The Chinese government has also enacted more than 30 administrative decrees regarding environmental protection, including the Regulations for the Prevention and Control of Noise Pollution, Regulations on Nature Reserves, Regulations on the Prevention of and Protection Against Radiation from Radio Isotopes and Radioactive Device, Regulations on the Safe Administration of Chemicals and Other Dangerous Materials, Provisional Regulations on the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution in the Huaihe River Drainage Area, Regulations Governing Environmental Protection Administration in Offshore Oil Exploration and Development, Regulations on the Control of Marine Wastes Dumping, Regulations for the Implementation of the Protection of Terrestrial Wildlife, Pro"ivisional Regulations on the Administration of National Parks, Regulations on the Protection of Basic Farmland, and Regulations on Urban Afforestation. In addition, departments concerned have also issued a number of administrative rules and decrees on environmental protection.

　　中国地方人民代表大会和地方人民政府为实施国家环境保护法律，结合本地区的具体情况，制定和颁布了６００多项环境保护地方性法规。

To implement the state's environmental protection laws and regulations, people's congresses and people's governments at local levels, proceeding from specific conditions in their own areas, have enacted and promulgated more than 600 local laws on environmental protection.

　　环境标准是中国环境法律体系的一个重要组成部分，包括环境质量标准、污染物排放标准、环境基础标准、样品标准和方法标准。环境质量标准、污染物排放标准分为国家标准和地方标准。到１９９５年底，中国颁布了３６４项各类国家环境标准。中国法律规定，环境质量标准和污染物排放标准属于强制性标准，违反强制性环境标准，必须承担相应的法律责任。

Environmental standards are an important component of China's environmental statutory framework. They include environmental quality standards, pollutant discharge or emission standards, basic environmental criteria, criteria for samples, and criteria for methodology. The environmental quality standards and pollutant discharge or emission standards are divided into state standards and local standards. By the end of 1995, China had promulgated state environmental standards on 364 items. As stipulated in Chinese law, the environmental quality standards and pollutant discharge standards are compulsory standards, and those who violate these compulsory environmental standards must bear the corresponding legal responsibility.

　　在建立健全环境法律体系的过程中，中国把环境执法放在与环境立法同等重要的位置，连续４年开展了全国环境执法检查，对污染和破坏环境的行为进行严肃查处，对环境违法犯罪行为进行严厉打击。中国十分重视人民群众和新闻舆论对环境违法行为的监督，开辟了人民群众反映环境问题的渠道，加强了新闻媒介对环境违法行为的揭露和曝光。

In the process of establishing and improving the environmental statutory framework, China attaches equal importance to environmental law enforcement and environmental legislation. For four years in a row, China has conducted nationwide checks on the enforcement of environmental legislation to seriously deal with acts of polluting and damaging the environment and severely punish environmental law violations. China pays great attention to supervision exercised by the people and media over law-breaking activities regarding the environment -- it has opened channels for the masses of people to report on environmental problems and adopted measures for the media to expose environmental law-breaking activities.

　　应该指出的是，中国的环境法制建设还需要进一步完善，如某些方面存在着立法空白、有些法律的内容需要补充和修改、有法不依、执法不严的现象等。因此，继续加强环境法制建设仍是一项重要的战略任务。

But it should be pointed out that China's environmental legislative work needs to be further improved. For instance, some areas still remain uncovered, some contents are yet to be amended or revised and there are still the phenomena of not fully observing or enforcing laws. Therefore, to make continuous efforts to strengthen environmental legislative work remains an important strategic task.

　　中国同样重视环境管理体制建设，现在已经建立起由全国人民代表大会立法监督，各级政府负责实施，环境保护行政主管部门统一监督管理，各有关部门依照法律规定实施监督管理的体制。

China attaches equal importance to the establishment of an environmental administrative system. It has established a system in which the National People's Congress enacts the laws, governments at different levels take responsibility for their enforcement, the administrative departments in charge of environmental protection exercise overall supervision and administration and the various departments concerned exercise supervision and administration according to the stipulations of the law.

　　全国人民代表大会设有环境与资源保护委员会，负责组织起草和审议环境与资源保护方面的法律草案并提出报告，监督环境与资源保护方面法律的执行，提出同环境与资源保护问题有关的议案，开展与各国议会之间在环境与资源保护领域的交往。一些省、市人民代表大会也相应设立了环境与资源保护机构。

The National People's Congress has established an Environment and Resources Protection Committee, whose work it is to organize the formulation and examination of drafted laws related to environmental and resources protection and prepare the necessary reports, exercise supervision over the enforcement of laws governing environmental and resources protection, put forward motions related to the issue of environmental and resources protection, and conduct exchanges with parliaments in other countries in the field of environmental and resources protection. The people's congresses of some provinces and cities have also established corresponding environmental and resources protection organizations.

　　国务院环境保护委员会由国务院有关部门的领导成员组成，是国务院环境保护工作的议事和协调机构。其主要任务是：研究和审议国家环境保护与经济协调发展的方针、政策和措施，指导并协调解决有关的重大环境问题，监督检查各地区、各部门贯彻执行环境保护法律法规的情况，推动和促进全国环境保护事业的发展。省、市、县人民政府也相应设立了环境保护委员会。

The Environmental Protection Committee under the State Council is made up of leaders of various related ministries under the State Council. It is the State Council's consultancy and coordination agency for environmental protection work. Its major tasks are studying and examining the principles, policies and measures relating to coordinative development of the country's economy and environmental protection, giving guidance to and coordinating efforts in tackling major environmental problems, exercising supervision over and conducting checks on the implementation of the environmental protection laws and regulations by various localities and departments, and promoting the development of environmental protection undertakings throughout the country. The people's governments at the provincial, city and county levels have also established corresponding environmental protection committees.

　　国家环境保护局是国务院环境保护行政主管部门，对全国环境保护工作实施统一监督管理。省、市、县人民政府也相继设立了环境保护行政主管部门，对本辖区的环境保护工作实施统一监督管理。目前，中国县级以上环境保护行政主管部门有２５００多个，从事环境行政管理、监测、监理、统计、科学研究、宣传教育等的总人数达８．８万人。

The National Environmental Protection Agency is the competent environmental protection administration agency under the State Council, whose task it is to exercise overall supervision and administration over the country's environ"imen tal protection work. The people's governments at the provincial, city and county levels have also successively established environmental protection administration departments to carry out overall supervision and administration of the environ"imen tal protection work in their localities. At present, there are nationwide more than 2,500 environmental protection administration departments above the county level with a total staff of 88,000 engaged in environmental administration, monitoring, inspection and control, statistics collection, scientific research, pub"ilicity and education.

　　中国各级政府的综合部门、资源管理部门和工业部门也设立了环境保护机构，负责相应的环境与资源保护工作。中国多数大中型企业也设有环境保护机构，负责本企业的污染防治以及推行清洁生产。目前，各部门和企业的各类环境保护人员已达２０多万人。

Environmental protection organizations have also been established in comprehensive administration departments, resources administration departments and industrial departments under governments at various levels to take charge of related environmental and resources protection work. Most of China's large and medium-sized enterprises have also set up environmental protection organizations responsible for their own anti-pollution work and the promotion of cleaner production. At present, the total number of various types of environmental protection workers employed by the various departments and enterprises exceeds 200,000.

工业污染防治和城市环境综合整治
The Prevention and Control of Industrial Pollution and the Comprehensive Improvement of the Urban Environment

　　中国政府把工业污染防治作为环境保护工作的重点，经过２０多年的不懈努力，中国工业污染防治取得了较大进展。

The Chinese government regards prevention and control of industrial pollution as the focal point of environmental protection. Thanks to unremitting efforts over the past 20-odd years, China has made great progress in this regard.

实现工业污染防治的战略转变。
Changes in the strategy for the prevention and control of industrial pollution have been effected. 
７０年代，中国的工业污染防治主要集中在点源治理上。进入８０年代，中国通过调整不合理的工业布局、产业结构和产品结构，结合技术改造，强化环境管理等政策和措施，对工业污染进行综合防治。到９０年代，中国在建立社会主义市场经济体制的过程中，转变传统的发展战略，推行清洁生产，走可持续发展道路。在工业污染防治的指导思想上确立“三个转变”，即：在污染防治基本战略上，从侧重污染的末端治理逐步转变为工业生产全过程控制；在污染物排放控制上，由重浓度控制转变为浓度与总量控制相结合；在污染治理方式上，由重分散的点源治理转变为集中控制与分散治理相结合。
In the 1970s efforts to prevent and control industrial pollution in China mainly concentrated on the control of point sources. In the 1980s China carried out prevention and control of industrial pollution in a comprehensive way through the readjustment of irrational industrial distribution, the overall industrial structure and the product mix in combination with technical transformation, strengthened environmental management and other policies and measures. In the course of founding the socialist market economic system in the 1990s China has changed its traditional development strategy, promoted clean production and embarked on the sustainable development road. In guiding concept for the prevention and control of industrial pollution, ``three changes'' have been decided upon, i.e., regarding basic strategy, China will gradually change its strategy of end-of-pipe pollution control into pollution control during the whole process of industrial production; with respect to the control of pollutant discharge, concentration control will be replaced by a combination of the control of concentration and that of total quantity; and with regard to pollution control methods, focus on the control of scattered point sources will be replaced by a combination of centralized and scattered controls.

工业污染防治的政策法规体系初步形成。
Policy and legislation for preventing and controlling industrial pollution have taken initial shape as a coherent system. 
为有效地防治工业污染，中国政府制定了“预防为主，防治结合”、“谁污染，谁治理”、“强化环境管理”三大环境保护政策，以及资源综合利用政策、结合技术改造防治工业污染政策、城市环境综合整治政策、环保技术政策、环保产业政策等。在颁布的环境保护法律法规中，也对工业污染防治作出了明确规定。各级地方政府结合本地实际情况，制定了地方性的工业污染防治政策。
In order to effectively prevent and control industrial pollution, the Chinese government has drawn up three major policies for environmental protection, i.e., ``putting prevention first and combining prevention with control,'' ``making the causer of pollution responsible for treating it'' and ``intensifying environmental management.'' In addition, it has drawn up the policy on the comprehensive utilization of resources, the policy on preventing and controlling industrial pollution in combination with technical transformation, the policy on over"iall improvement of the urban environment, the policy on environmental protection technology, and the policy on environmental protection industries. The laws and regulations on environmental protection that have been promulgated include explicit provisions on the prevention and control of industrial pollution. Local governments at all levels have worked out local policies on the prevention and control of industrial pollution in accordance with their actual conditions.

企业环境监督管理得到加强。
Enterprise environment supervision and management have been reinforced. 
中国政府通过推行环境影响评价和“三同时”（防治环境污染和破坏的设施与生产主体工程同时设计、同时施工、同时投产使用）制度，对控制新污染源起到了显著作用。全国县以上建设项目环境影响评价率和“三同时”执行率分别达到６０.８％和８７.３％。到１９９５年底，全国开展排污申报登记的城市有４８０个，企业７.７万家；发放排污许可证的城市有２４０个，企业１.４万家，发证１.６万份。１９７９年以来，全国共征收排污费２４７亿元。
The Chinese government has promoted the enforcement of the environmental impact assessment system and the ``three-at-the-same-time'' system (i.e., facilities for preventing and controlling environmental pollution and destruction shall be planned, constructed and put into use at the same time as the main production projects). These steps have played remarkable roles in controlling new pollution sources. The nation's environmental impact assessment rate of construction projects above the county level and the implementation rate of the three-at-the-same-time'' system have reached, respectively, 60.8 percent and 87.3 percent. By the end of 1995, 480 cities and 77,000 enterprises had made pollution discharge declarations and registrations; 240 cities had issued a total of 16,000 pollutant discharge licences to 14,000 enterprises. Since 1979 China has collected 24.7 billion yuan in pollutant discharge fees.

工业污染防治措施逐步完善。
Measures for preventing and controlling industrial pollution have gradually been perfected.
一是通过调整产业结构、产品结构和结合技术改造，推行清洁生产，完成了一大批污染治理项目。化工、冶金、轻工、机械、电力、建材等行业积极推行清洁生产，加速技术改造，强制淘汰了一大批污染重、能耗物耗高的设备和产品，使工业生产连年增长，污染物排放量持续下降，效益逐年提高。吉林化学工业公司是一个老企业，多年来，他们依靠科技进步，对资源浪费严重、排污量大的生产装置进行技术改造，从根本上解决了多种化学品的污染。二是结合城市环境综合整治和区域改建，关闭、搬迁、治理了一批污染严重的企业，使部分地区的污染趋势得到缓解。北京市关闭了污染严重的首钢特钢南厂，消除了市区一大污染源。上海市加强苏州河、黄浦江上游和重点城区的污染防治，使部分城区的污染得到了治理。三是加大了污染限期治理的力度。从１９７８年起，国家下达的两批３６７项限期治理项目及地方政府安排的２２万项限期治理项目已经基本完成。四是污染防治向区域和流域综合整治发展。从８０年代后期起，中国政府分别对本溪市、包头市大气污染，白洋淀、淮河流域水污染等区域和流域进行综合整治。１９９５年中国政府颁布了《淮河流域水污染防治暂行条例》，淮河流域水污染防治工作正在按计划积极推进。五是大力推进节能降耗，提高废气、废水、废渣“三废”处理能力和综合利用率。“八五”期间（１９９１—１９９５年），中国每万元国内生产总值能耗由１９９０年的５.３吨标准煤下降到１９９５年的３.９４吨标准煤，累计节约和少用３.５８亿吨标准煤，年节能率为５.８％。１９９５年，全国县以上工业企业废水处理率７６.８％，燃料燃烧废气消烟除尘率８８.２％，生产工艺废气净化处理率６８.９％，工业固体废物综合利用率４３.０％，工业“三废”综合利用产值１９０亿元。太原钢铁公司退休工人李双良，从１９８３年起带领２０多名老工人用了１０年时间将一座巨大的渣山削为平地，解决了太原钢铁公司长期以来危害一方的重污染源，使废钢渣得到了综合利用，仅回收废钢铁就达９０万吨，创造价值１.６亿元。
First, China has completed a great number of pollution-control projects through the readjustment of the industrial structure and product mix, and promoted clean production through technical transformation. Chemical, metallurgical, light, machine-building, power and construction materials industries have actively adopted clean production, speeded up technical transformation and firmly eliminated a large amount of equipment and products characterized by heavy pollution and high consumption of energy and materials. Consequently, industrial production has increased for several years running, the discharge of pollutants has declined steadily and the economic returns of enterprises have gone up year by year. The Jilin Chemical Industrial Company is an old enterprise, but for many years it has relied on progress in science and technology to carry out technical transformation of its production equipment which used to cause a serious waste of resources and produced a large amount of pollution. As a result, it has fundamentally eliminated pollution from various chemicals. Second, in combination with the comprehensive improvement of the urban environment and regional reconstruction, a number of enterprises featured by heavy pollution have been closed down, moved away or otherwise put under control, thus alleviating the trend of pollution in some regions. The Beijing Municipal Government closed down the heavily polluting south section of the Special Steel Factory of the Capital Iron and Steel Company, eliminating a large pollution source in the city proper. Shanghai has strengthened the prevention and control of pollution in the upper reaches of the Suzhou and Huangpu rivers and in major urban districts, so that pollution in some of the districts has been brought under control. Third, the dynamics of setting deadlines for eliminating pollution have been reinforced. Since 1978 the Chinese government has announced two groups of scheduled pollution-control projects, totaling 367, and local governments have designated 220,000 pollution-control projects, which have basically been completed. Fourth, the prevention and control of pollution is developing toward regional and river valley comprehensive improvement. Since the late 1980s the Chinese government has adopted measures to comprehensively alleviate air pollution in Benxi and Baotou cities, and water pollution in the Baiyangdian Lake and Huaihe River drainage basins. In 1995 the Chinese government promulgated the Pro"ivisional Regulations on the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution in the Huaihe River Drainage Area, and the work is being actively carried out in accordance with the plan. Fifth, efforts have been stepped up to save energy and reduce consumption. The capability to treat waste gas, waste water and industrial residue (the ``three wastes'') has been enhanced and the comprehensive utilization rate of these materials has been increased. During the Eighth Five-Year Plan period (1991-95) energy consumption for every ten thousand yuan worth of the gross domestic product (GDP) decreased from 5.3 tons of the standard coal in 1990 to 3.94 tons in 1995, saving a grand total of 358 million tons of the standard coal, or an annual averge economization rate of 5.8 percent. In 1995 the waste water treatment rate of the industrial enterprises above the county level all over the country reached 76.8 percent; the smoke and dust removal rate of waste gas from burning fuel, 88.2 percent; waste gas purification rate from production processes, 68.9 percent; and the comprehensive utilization rate of industrial solid waste, 43 percent. Output value attained through the comprehensive utilization of the industrial ``three wastes'' came to 19 billion yuan. Starting in 1983, Li Shuang"iliang, a retired worker of the Taiyuan Iron and Steel Company, and 20 other retired workers spent 10 years removing a huge slag heap, thus eliminating a serious, long-standing pollution source of the Taiyuan Iron and Steel Company. The slag was utilized in a comprehensive way, with 900,000 tons of waste iron and steel worth 160 million yuan recovered.

　　中国是一个以煤为主要能源的国家，全国烟尘排放量的７０％、二氧化硫排放量的９０％都来自于燃煤，使得工业和人口集中的城市产生了比较严重的大气污染，有些地区和城市还产生了酸雨并呈发展趋势。中国政府已经采取发展洁净煤技术、清洁燃烧技术和征收二氧化硫排污费等政策措施来控制酸雨。中国酸雨问题专家经过多年的研究证明，中国内地排放形成酸雨的污染物主要在境内输送，酸雨主要分布于长江以南、青藏高原以东地区及四川盆地。

China is a country with coal as its main energy source. Seventy percent of the smoke and dust in the air and 90 percent of the sulfur dioxide emission come from burning coal. As a result, the cities with concentrated industries and populations suffer from serious air pollution. Acid rain has occurred, and the situation has gone from bad to worse in some regions and cities. The Chinese government has adopted some measures, such as developing clean coal technology and clean-combustion technology, and collecting sulfur dioxide emission fees, to control acid rain. A long-term study by Chinese experts on the issue of acid rain proves that the precursors of acid rain generated from the emission source in Chinese mainland are mainly transported within Chinese territory, and the acid rain is mainly in the areas south of the Yangtze River, in regions east of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, and in the Sichuan Basin.

中国同其他的发展中国家一样，无论是现在还是到本世纪末，人均能源消费水平和二氧化碳排放量都远远低于世界平均水平。
Like other developing countries, China's per capita energy consumption level and the emitted sulfur dioxide are much lower than the world average level at present, and it will remain so by the end of this century. 
根据《气候变化框架公约》，中国没有限制二氧化碳排放的具体义务，但本着对保护全球气候负责的态度，采取了节约能源与发展能源工业并重的方针，努力提高能源利用效率，积极调整能源结构，大力发展水电，适当发展核电，加强地热、太阳能、风能、海洋能等新能源的研究与开发，以减少温室气体的排放。
According to the Framework Convention on Climatic Changes, China is under no specific obligation to limit the emission of carbon dioxide. However, mindful of its responsibility for protection of the global climate, China follows the principle of attaching equal importance to economization on energy and expansion of the energy industry, striving to raise its energy utilization efficiency and to readjust its energy structure. While appropriately developing nuclear power, China spares no effort to develop hydroelectric power and to strengthen research into and exploitation of geothermal power, solar energy, wind energy, oceanic energy and other new energy sources, so as to reduce the green-house gas emission.

改革开放以来，中国国民生产总值翻了两番，污染物排放的增长速度明显低于经济增长速度，部分地区和城市的一些环境质量指标基本保持稳定，有的还在一定程度上有所改善。但是，中国工业化还处于初级发展阶段，现代化管理水平不高，工业布局和产业结构需要进一步调整，技术装备和生产工艺比较落后，因此，防治工业污染仍是中国环境保护的一项艰巨任务。

Since the initiation of the policies of reform and opening to the outside world, China's GNP has quadrupled, but the growth of the emission of pollutants is clearly slower than the economic growth. Some environmental quality indices of some regions and cities have basically remained stable, and some localities have made improvements to a certain extent. In spite of this, China's industrialization is still in the primary stage of development, with a low level of modernized management. Its industrial distribution and structure need to be further readjusted. With comparatively backward equipment and production technology, the pre"ivention and control of industrial pollution remain an arduous task of environmental protection in China.

　　中国政府历来把城市作为环境保护工作的一个重点。１０多年来，中国加快了城市化进程。１９８０年全国城镇人口为１９１４０万人，１９９５年达到３５１７１万人；１９８０年全国设市城市２２３个，１９９５年增至６４０个；城市化水平由１９８０年的１９.３９％提高到１９９５年的２８.８５％。同其他国家一样，中国在城市化进程中也产生了环境污染问题，对此，中国政府采取有力措施加以控制，努力改善城市环境质量。

The Chinese government has always considered the cities as key points in environmental protection work. In the past 10-odd years China has speeded up urbanization. In 1980 the urban population in China totaled 191.4 million, a figure which rose to 351.71 million in 1995. In 1980 China had 223 administratively designated cities, which went up to 640 in 1995. The urbanization level increased from 19.39 percent in 1980 to 28.85 percent in 1995. Just like other countries, the issue of environmental pollution has also appeared in the course of China's urbanization. Therefore the Chinese government has adopted effective measures to control environmental pollution and done its best to improve the quality of the urban environment.

编制城市总体规划，调整城市功能布局。到１９９５年底，中国６４０个设市城市都编制了城市总体规划，３１５５９个建制镇也编制了总体规划。依据《城市规划法》，在编制城市总体规划时，把保护和改善城市生态环境、防治污染和其他公害等环境保护内容纳入城市总体规划。许多城市根据总体规划的要求，在老区改造和新区开发中，按照城市功能分区，调整工业布局，加大工业污染防治力度，改变工厂和居民混杂状况，从生产和生活两个方面控制城市环境污染，建成一大批布局合理、社会服务功能齐全的住宅小区。中国确定了５２个环境保护重点城市，公布了９９座国家级历史文化名城予以重点保护。

Drawing up overall city plans and readjusting the layout of urban functions. By the end of 1995 each of the 640 cities in China had worked out its own overall city plan. So had each of the 31,559 administratively designated towns. In accordance with the Law on City Planning, while working out an overall city plan, the city must include in the plan details of environmental protection, such as protecting and improving the city's ecological environment, and preventing and controlling pollution and other public hazards. In light of the requirements of the overall planning, many cities, while transforming the old areas and developing new ones, have, in accordance with the city's function zoning, readjusted the industrial layout, strengthened the prevention and control of industrial pollution, changed the situation in which factories and residents share the same areas, controlled urban environmental pollution caused by production and in people's daily lives, and constructed a large number of residential quarters with reasonable layout and complete social services. In addition, China has designated 52 key environmental protection cities, and put 99 leading national-level historical and cultural cities under special protection.

加强基础设施建设，提高污染防治能力。目前，全国城市居民用气普及率６８.４％，城市污水集中处理率２０％，城市垃圾粪便无害化率４５.４％，城市建成区的绿化覆盖率２３.８％。在１９９４年，北京市投资１５１.３亿元用于城市基础设施建设，其中５０多亿元用于环境治理设施建设，先后建成了日处理５０万吨的高碑店污水处理厂、大型的大屯垃圾转运站和阿苏卫垃圾卫生填埋场，使北京市的环境面貌从总体上有了较大改观。

Strengthening the construction of infrastructure and improving the capability to prevent and control pollution. At present, 68.4 percent of urban residents in China use gas for fuel and heating; the centralized disposal rate of urban sewage is 20 percent; the innocurity rate of urban garbage and fecal disposal is 45.4 percent; and the afforestation rate is 23.8 percent. In 1994 Beijing invested 15.13 billion yuan in the construction of urban infrastructure, of which over five billion yuan was used to construct environmental improvement facilities. It built the Gaobeidian Sewage Treatment Plant, with a daily handling capacity of 500,000 tons, and the large-scale Datun Garbage Transfer Station and Ahsuwei sanitary landll, thus greatly improving Beijing's environment overall.

开展城市环境综合整治，改善城市环境质量。从１９８９年起，中国政府在全国推行城市环境综合整治定量考核制度，国家和省级政府分别对３７个重点城市和３３０多个城市进行定量考核。这项制度的实施，加强了各级领导对城市环境保护的责任感，并把定量考核纳入政府工作议事日程，初步形成了市长统一领导、各有关部门分工负责、广大群众积极参与的城市环境综合整治管理体制和运行机制。全国各城市加大环境整治投资，加快建设速度，取得了明显效果。到１９９５年，全国建成烟尘控制区１１３３３平方公里，环境噪声达标区１８００平方公里，增加公共绿地４.９亿平方米。杭州市中东河、成都市府南河、天津市海河、上海市苏州河、南京市秦淮河、南通市濠河等一大批城市河道经过大规模的整体改造，使城市水环境状况有所改善。

Comprehensive improvement of the urban environment and improving the quality of the urban environment. Since 1989 the Chinese government has promoted the urban environment comprehensive improvement examination system throughout the country. The state and the governments at the provincial level have carried out examinations in 37 key cities and other 330-plus cities. The implementation of this system has enhanced the sense of responsibility of leaders at all levels for urban environmental protection, and such examinations have been included in the governments' work agendas. Hence a management system and operation mechanism for the comprehensive improvement of the urban environment under the unified leadership of mayors, carried out by different departments according to their respective divisions of responsibility and actively participated in by the broad masses of the people have taken initial shape. All cities in China have increased their investment in environmental improvement and speeded up relevant construction. Obvious results have been achieved. By 1995 China had constructed 11,333 sq km of smoke-and-dust control zones, and 1,800 sq km of up-to-standard noise-control zones, and increased public lawns by 490 million square meters. A large number of urban waterways, such as the Zhongdong River in Hangzhou, the Funan River in Chengdu, the Haihe River in Tianjin, the Suzhou River in Shanghai, the Qinhuai River in Nanjing and the Haohe River in Nantong, have been cleaned up on a large scale. Hence, the urban water environment has been improved.

　　辽宁省本溪市通过城市环境综合整治和生态建设，使全市污染严重的２１条“烟龙”、１７股污水、两座废渣山得到治理，建成２２０平方公里的环城森林公园。这座曾经被称为“卫星看不见的城市”环境状况得到明显改善。

Thanks to comprehensive urban environmental improvement and ecological construction, Benxi City in Liaoning Province has cleared up 21 ``smoke dragons,'' 17 polluted springs and two mounds of industrial residue which were notorious sources of pollution. It has also constructed a round-the-city forest park with an area of 220 sq km. Consequently, Benxi, which used to be known as one of ``the cities on earth which could not be seen from a satellite'' because of air pollution, has made a remarkable improvement in its environment.

国土整治与农村环境保护

 Territorial Control and Rural Environmental Protection

　　国土整治是中国实施可持续发展战略的一个组成部分。改革开放以来，中国政府开展了大规模的国土整治。

Territorial control forms part of China's work in implementing the sustainable development strategy. Since the start of the reform and opening-up era, the Chinese government has carried out territorial control on a large scale.

国土整治规划工作取得新进展。在国土整治规划工作中，中国政府制定了一批全国及跨省区或重点地区的国土整治规划，如《全国土地利用总体规划纲要》、《全国造林绿化规划纲要》、《全国海洋开发规划》、《全国水土保持规划纲要》、《中国七大江河流域综合规划》、《三峡地区经济发展规划》、《长江三角洲及长江沿江地区经济规划》、《西北地区经济规划要点》、《晋陕蒙接壤地区资源开发与环境保护规划》等。一些省、市也编制或修编了地方国土整治规划和土地利用总体规划。到１９９５年底，省、市（地）、县三级土地利用总体规划编制工作分别完成了６０％、６９％和６３％。
New progress has been made in territorial control planning. In this work the Chinese government has formulated a sequence of national, trans-provincial and key-regional territorial control plans, such as the National Program for Overall Land Use Planning, the National Program for Afforestation, the National Plan for Marine Development, the National Program for Water and Soil Conservation, the Comprehensive Plan for China's Seven Major River Valleys, the Plan for Economic Development in the Three Gorges Area, the Economic Plan for the Yangtze River Delta and Areas Along the River, Key Points of the Economic Plan for Northwestern Areas, and the Resources Development and Environment Protection Plan for the Juncture of Shanxi, Shaanxi and Inner Mongolia. Some provinces and cities have also drawn up or revised local territorial control plans and the overall plan for land use. By the end of 1995 the overall plan for land use had been 60 percent completed at the provincial level, 69 percent at the city (prefectural) level and 63 percent at the county level.

国土整治研究取得多项成果。为配合制定《中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发展“九五”计划和２０１０年远景目标纲要》，中国政府从实现经济、社会、人口、资源与环境相互协调和可持续发展出发，组织开展了国土资源开发与环境整治、全国国土总体规划以及矿产资源对国民经济保证程度等重大问题研究，完成了１９９６—２０１０年全国国土资源开发与环境整治重大问题等专项研究报告，提出了优化国土资源开发与整治总体框架、区域发展战略、国土资源开发布局、国土整治和环境保护目标及对策。
Many achievements have been made in research on territorial control. To help formulate the Ninth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development and the Outline of the Long-Term Target for the Year 2010, the Chinese government, proceeding from realizing coordination and sustainable development of the economy, society, population, resources and environment, has organized research on vital issues such as the development of territorial resources and environmental control, the overall plan for the national territory, and how well mineral resources can satisfy the demands of the national economy. It has also completed the Major Issues on the Development of National Territorial Resources and Environmental Control During 1996-2010 and other research reports on special subjects. The government has laid down the overall framework of optimizing the development and control of territorial resources, the regional development strategy and distribution of territorial resources exploitation, as well as the targets and measures of territorial control and environmental protection.

主要江河湖泊开发整治成效显著。新中国成立以来，中国政府把以防治洪涝为重点的大江大河和主要湖泊的综合开发与整治列为水利建设的重要任务。“八五”期间，对长江中下游、黄河下游、淮河、海河、松花江、辽河、太湖等主要江河湖泊的重要堤防继续进行加高、加固、河道整治和分滞洪区建设，建成和新开工建设一批重要的、具有控制性功能和综合效益的骨干工程。为解决北方地区水资源短缺问题，中国政府积极推进跨流域调水工程的规划和建设工作，１９９５年１１月组织开展了实施南水北调中、东、西线工程的全面论证工作。

Notable successes have been attained in the harnessing of main rivers and lakes. Since the foundation of New China in 1949 the Chinese government has taken comprehensive exploitation and control of major rivers and lakes, with emphasis on the prevention and control of flood and waterlogging, as an important task of water conservancy construction. During the Eighth Five-Year Plan period, on the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River, the lower reaches of the Yellow River, and on the Huaihe, Haihe, Songhua and Liaohe rivers and Lake Taihu, the main dikes were heightened and reinforced, waterways were cleaned up, and flood diversion projects were built. The construction of a group of key projects for water control and other uses were completed or started. To compensate for lack of water resources in northern areas, the Chinese government vigorously promoted the planning and construction of water-diversion projects between different drainage basins. In November 1995 it sponsored an overall feasibility study of the middle, eastern and western lines projects for diverting water from south to north.

　　三峡工程是治理和开发长江的一项跨世纪宏大工程，建成后可有效地控制长江上游洪水，提高中、下游防洪能力，减免洪涝灾害对生态与环境的破坏。三峡工程利用水能发电，与燃煤电厂相比，可大量地减少污染物的排放。中国政府组织有关专家完成了《长江三峡工程生态与环境影响及对策的论证报告》，批准了《三峡工程环境影响报告书》。这项工程对生态与环境可能产生的不利影响，中国政府将采取有效措施加以解决。

The Three Gorges Project is a gigantic, trans-century project for harnessing and developing the Yangtze River. When it is completed, floods on the upper reaches will be effectively controlled and areas on the middle and lower reaches will be able to improve their anti-flood capability, thus lessening the harmful effects on the ecological environment. Hydroelectricity, which will be the energy discharged by the project, causes much less pollution than coal-burning power plants. The government has organized experts to work out the Report on the Impact of the Three Gorges Project on the Ecology and Environment, and Countermeasures, and has approved the Environmental Impact Statement of the Three Gorges Project. The government will adopt a sequence of measures to minimize the unfavorable effects on the ecology and the environment that could be caused by the Three Gorges Project.

全面推进土地保护、开发与整治。为了切实保护好耕地，根据《基本农田保护条例》，全国开展了划定基本农田保护区工作。到１９９５年底，有２１００个县级单位完成了划定任务，７０％以上的耕地得到了有效保护。加强了建设用地计划管理，较好地控制了建设用地总量和结构，乱占耕地现象有所好转，１９９５年，全国各类建设占用耕地比上年下降２０.８％。近年来，为了加快防治沙漠化工作的进程，中国政府编制了《１９９１—２０００年全国治沙工程规划要点》，制定１０年治理开发６６６.７万公顷沙漠化土地规划目标，全国防治沙漠化工程的２０个重点县、９个试验区、２２个示范基地已经纳入国民经济发展计划加以实施。“八五”期间，防治沙漠化工程完成综合治理面积达３７５.９万公顷。中国政府重视水土保持工作，有效地防治了水土流失，改善了生态环境和农业条件。目前，全国已建立了２５片国家级水土流失重点治理区，实施了七大流域水土保持工程，在１万多条水土流失严重的小流域开展了山水田林综合治理。全国累计治理水土流失面积６７００万公顷，修建了大批蓄水保土工程，平均每年减少土壤流失量１１亿多吨，增加保水能力１８０亿立方米。黄土高原水土流失综合治理区已累计治理１５００万公顷，使３０％的水土流失面积得到不同程度的治理，年输入黄河的泥沙减少３亿吨以上。自《土地复垦规定》颁布实施以来，全国多数省、市制定了土地复垦规定实施办法，１０多个省、自治区出台了土地复垦资金征收、使用和管理办法，土地复垦成效显著。从１９８７年到１９９５年，全国累计开发复垦耕地约３５０万公顷，其中复垦利用各类废弃土地约６０万公顷。１９８９年开展了全国主要矿产开发省（区）复垦土地试点工作，１９９５年开始建设３个国家级煤矿塌陷地复垦示范区，制定了全国土地复垦技术标准。江苏省铜山县七年投资５６００万元，复垦土地０.６６万公顷，实现了复垦与用地的基本平衡。
Land preservation, exploitation and control have been promoted on a full scale. In order to put cultivated land under proper protection, basic farmland preservation areas have been delimited all over the country, in accordance with the Regulations on the Protection of Basic Farmland. By the end of 1995, 2,100 units at the county level had finished the work, with well over 70 percent of farmland put under effectual protection. Planned management of the land to be used for construction has been strengthened, putting the total area and makeup of such land under proper control. Random occupation of farmland has been curbed to some extent. In 1995, farmland used for construction was 20.8 percent less than the previous year. In recent years, the government has formulated the Key Points of National Planning for Desertication Control During 1991-2000 to speed up the desertification prevention and control project. It is planned that 6.667 million hectares of desertified land will be treated over ten years. The development of 20 key counties, nine experimental areas and 22 demonstration bases of the national desertification prevention and control project has been brought into line with the development plan of the national economy. During the Eighth Five-Year Plan period 3.759 million hectares of desertified land were tackled in a comprehensive way. The Chinese government also devotes much attention to water and soil conservation. It has effectively prevented soil erosion and improved the ecological environment and agricultural conditions. At present, 25 key soil erosion control areas have been established at the national level. Water and soil conservation projects are carried out in seven big river valleys. In more than 10,000 small river valleys with serious soil erosion, problems concerning mountains, rivers, farmland and forests are tackled in a comprehensive way. Soil erosion has been checked in a total area of 67 million hectares, and a great number of water and soil conservation projects have been completed, making eroded soil decrease by 1.1 billion tons every year and water conservation capacity increase by 18 billion cubic meters. In the comprehensive soil erosion control area in the Loess Plateau, a total of 15 million hectares of land have been treated -- 30 percent of the soil erosion area -- with over 300 million tons less silt flowing into the Yellow River every year. Since the publication of the Regulations on Land Reclamation, most of the provinces and cities have worked out procedures for implementation of these regulations and some dozen provinces and autonomous regions have put into effect procedures for raising funds for land reclamation and for the use and administration of these funds. As a result, remarkable progress has been made in the country's reclamation of discarded land. From 1987 to 1995 a total of about 3.5 million hectares of land were reclaimed, among which 600,000 hectares had been waste land. In 1989 the experimental work of land reclamation was carried out in major mineral-producing provinces. In 1995 construction of three national-level reclamation demonstration zones was started in sunken areas of coalfields, while the national reclamation technical standards were stipulated. Tongshan County in Jiangsu Province invested 56 million yuan to reclaim 6,600 hectares of land, basically balancing land reclamation with land use.

抗御自然灾害的能力得到加强。中国人民在长期与自然灾害斗争中积累了丰富的经验，制定了“预防为主，防治结合”、“防救结合”等一系列方针政策。初步建立了防御各种自然灾害的工作体系，形成了一支具有一定实践经验、学科基本配套、门类比较齐全的科研队伍，监测主要自然灾害的台网已初具规模。
The ability to combat natural disasters has been improved. The Chinese people have accumulated abundant experience in their protracted struggles against natural disasters, in which they laid down principles like ``putting prevention first and combining prevention and control,'' and ``combining pre"ivention and rescue.'' A working system has been primarily established to avert all kinds of natural disasters, and a contingent of experienced scientists and researchers of various disciplines has been organized and monitoring stations and networks for main natural disasters have taken initial shape.

　　中国是一个历史悠久的农业国家，在发展农业生产的过程中，中国政府重视农村环境保护。

China has traditionally been an agricultural country. In developing agricultural production, the government attaches great importance to rural environmental protection.

生态农业建设取得成效。中国政府已经把发展生态农业列为实现环境与经济协调发展的重大对策。目前已确定的５０个生态农业试点县发挥了良好的示范作用，带动全国１０个地区和１００多个县的生态农业建设。据统计，生态农业试点县粮食总产量较以前增长１５％，亩产增长１０％以上，人均收入高于当地平均水平１２％。生态农业建设使农业生态环境得到明显改善，荒山荒坡得到治理，森林覆盖率大幅度提高，水土流失有所控制，土壤有机质含量提高，农业生态系统抗灾能力有所增强。与此同时，为促进区域可持续发展，主要以县域为单元的近百个生态示范区建设工作已全面启动。
Achievements have been made in eco-agriculture. The government has taken the development of eco-agriculture as an important means to realize the coordinated development of the environment and the economy. At present, the 50 eco-agricultural experimental counties designated by the state are playing positive and exemplary roles in the country, spurring development of eco-agriculture in 10 prefectures and over 100 counties. According to statistics, the total output of grain of the experimental counties has increased by 15 percent, output per mu by upwards of 10 percent, and the income per capita is 12 percent higher than the average level of the surrounding areas. The practice of eco-agriculture has brought about striking improvements in the agricultural ecological environment -- barren hills greened, forest acreage greatly raised, soil erosion controlled to some extent, organic matter content of the soil increased, and the ability of the agricultural ecological system to ward off natural disasters improved. In the meantime, in order to promote regional sustainable development, construction of some 100 ecological demonstration areas, mainly at the county level, has been started in an all-round way.

农村能源建设有了新进展。开展农村能源建设是保护和改善农村生态环境的一项重要措施。１９９１年开展的全国百县农村能源综合建设，形成年新增开发１０８０万吨标准煤和节约１１３７万吨标准煤的能力。１９９５年，全国农村开发与推广省柴节煤灶、沼气、太阳能、风能、地热和小水电等技术，形成了年新增和节约８０００万吨标准煤的能力，其中建成农用沼气池５６９万户，推广省柴节煤灶１.７亿户。
Further development of rural energy construction. Energy construction in rural areas is an important measure for protecting and improving the rural ecological environment. In 1991 comprehensive energy construction in rural areas was started in 100 counties. As a result, a capacity equivalent to 10.8 million tons more of standard coal was added every year and 11.37 million tons were saved. In 1995 fuel-saving stoves, methane, solar, wind and geothermal energy sources and small hydropower stations began to develop and were popularized in rural areas throughout the country. In this way, annually 80 million tons of standard coal equivalent can be saved and additionally produced. Methane-generating pits for agricultural use were dug to benefit 5.69 million households and fuel-saving stoves were in use in 170 million households.

乡镇企业污染防治有所加强。乡镇企业是中国农村经济的坚实支柱和国民经济的重要力量，随着乡镇企业迅速崛起所带来的环境问题也引起中国政府和人民普遍关注。１０多年来，乡镇企业的环境管理和污染防治取得了一定成效。东部沿海地区乡镇企业技术与装备水平逐步提高，结合小城镇、乡镇企业小区和经济小区建设，积极推行污染集中控制，取得成效。江苏省张家港市在经济高速发展的情况下，十分注意防止乡镇企业的环境污染，走上了环境与经济协调发展的道路。中西部地区对乡镇企业积极引导、扶持与监督，防止乡镇企业污染的扩散与蔓延。应该指出，乡镇企业的环境保护任务还十分艰巨，中国政府将继续引导乡镇企业健康发展，进一步加强环境管理，以防治和减少环境污染。
Pollution prevention and control in township enterprises have been strengthened. Township enterprises are a strong mainstay of the Chinese rural economy and an important sector of the national economy. Because of their rapid development, the environmental problems they caused attracted the serious attention of the Chinese government and people. In the past decade, environmental management and pollution prevention and control in township enterprises have made some progress. In areas along the eastern coast, the technical and equipment levels of township enterprises have been gradually raised. Centralized pollution control has been carried out, along with construction of small towns, township enterprises zones and economic development zones. All these steps have seen certain outcomes. Zhangjiagang City in Jiangsu Province is spurring its economy to develop rapidly while paying due attention to prevention of environmental pollution by township enterprises. It has thus realized a coordinated development of both the environment and the economy. In the central and western areas township enterprises have been actively guided, aided and supervised to prevent environmental pollution spreading. It should be pointed out that environmental protection in areas of township enterprises is still an arduous task, and that the government will keep guiding them to develop in a healthy way, preventing and alleviating environmental pollution through reinforced environmental management.

绿色食品和有机食品的开发受到欢迎。为了满足城乡人民对高质量食物日益增长的需求，保护农业自然资源和生态环境，１９９０年中国有关部门开始开发无污染、安全、优质、营养的“绿色食品”。到１９９５年底，全国共开发绿色食品产品５６８个，相当一部分成为名牌产品。绿色食品开发以来，全国有１１３万公顷土地受到较好保护。１９９５年，中国有关部门发布了有机（天然）食品标志管理办法，完全不使用化肥和农药的有机（天然）食品已在中国问世。
Development of green and organic foods is welcomed. In order to meet the people's increasing demands for high-quality food, and to protect agricultural natural resources and the ecological environment, relevant departments began in 1990 to develop ``green food,'' featuring pollution-free, safe, high-quality and nutritious contents. By the end of 1995 a total of 568 sorts of green food had been developed, many of them becoming well-known products. Since the start of the development of green food, 1.13 million hectares of land have been well protected. In 1995 a government department published the Procedures on the Administration of Organic (Natural) Food Labelling. Organic (natural) food unpolluted by chemical fertilizers and farm chemicals has now appeared in China.

生态环境与生物多样性的保护

 Protection of the Ecological Environment and Biodiversity

　　中国政府把生态环境保护作为环境保护工作的重点，经过长期努力，中国的生态环境保护和建设取得了较大成就。

The Chinese government regards ecological environmental protection as the focal point of its environmental protection work. Through protracted efforts the country has made outstanding achievements in the protection and nurturing of the ecological environment.

造林绿化取得成效。
Achievements have been made in afforestation. 
中国政府从５０年代开始组织开展大规模的植树造林，加强了森林资源培育、保护和管理，在合理利用森林资源方面有了较大进展。
Since the 1950s the Chinese government has organized large-scale tree planting activities and stepped up efforts for the fostering, protection and management of forest resources and consequently has made great progress in rational utilization of forest resources. 
改革开放以来，中国造林步伐加快，数量逐年增加，质量不断提高，实现了森林年生长量超过年消耗量，初步扭转了长期以来森林蓄积量持续下降的局面，进入了森林面积和蓄积量“双增长”的阶段。
Since the reform and opening up the afforestation efforts have been quickened, with the quantity increased annually and the quality improved continuously, thus basically eliminating the deficit in forest reserves which had existed for a long period, while the growth of forests has begun to exceed consumption. As a result, the era of increase both in forest acreage and reserve has dawned on the country. 
目前，全国森林面积达１.３４亿公顷，森林覆盖率上升到１３.９２％，人工造林保存面积达３３７９万公顷；全国累计有４４亿人次参加全民义务植树运动，义务植树２３０亿株；先后有１２个省（区）基本实现了消灭宜林荒山目标。
Currently, China's forest area totals 134 million hectares, which brings the country's forest cover up to 13.92 percent. Artificial afforestation covers 33.79 million hectares. Volunteers have contributed a total of 4.4 billion person-times to planting 23 billion trees. Once-barren mountains suitable for tree planting in 12 provinces and autonomous regions are now clothed with greenery.

中国政府特别重视林业生态工程建设。
The government has paid special attention to the construction of forest ecological projects. 
从１９７８年起，中国先后确立了以保护和改善自然生态环境、实现资源永续利用为主要目标的十大林业生态工程。
Since 1978 China has established ten forest ecological projects, with a scheduled afforestation area of 120 million hectares -- aimed mainly at protecting and improving the natural eco-environment and realizing the sustainable use of natural resources.

这十大林业生态工程是：“三北”（东北西部、华北北部、西北地区）防护林体系工程、长江中上游防护林体系工程、沿海防护林体系工程、平原农田防护林体系工程、太行山绿化工程、防治沙漠化工程、淮河太湖流域综合治理防护林体系工程、珠江流域综合治理防护林体系工程、辽河流域综合治理防护林体系工程、黄河中游防护林体系工程，规划造林总面积１.２亿公顷。目前，“三北”防护林体系工程已经完成一、二期工程，共造林１８５１万公顷，森林覆盖率由５.０５％提高到８.２％，４万多平方公里的“不毛之地”变成了绿色林地，１３０多万公顷沙地辟为农田、牧场、果园，１２％的沙漠化土地得到治理，１０％的沙漠化土地得到控制，１１００多万公顷农田得到林网保护，８９３万公顷草场得到恢复，产草量增加２０％以上。“三北”地区１／３县的农业生态环境开始趋向良性循环。长江中上游防护林体系工程７年累计营造林５４６万公顷；沿海防护林体系工程自１９９１年全面启动以来，累计营造林１６０万公顷，１.８万公里的海岸基干林带基本合拢；平原农田防护林体系工程累计有７６９个县（市）实现了平原绿化，占全国９１８个平原县的８４％；太行山绿化工程自１９９４年启动以来累计完成营造林１０２万公顷。
These projects are: the ``three norths'' shelterbelts (the western area of Northeast, and the northern parts of North and Northwest China), the shelterbelts along the upper and middle reaches of the Yangtze River, the coastal shelterbelts, the plain farmland shelterbelts, the Taihang Mountains afforestation project, the anti-desertification project, the shelterbelts for comprehensive control in the Huaihe River and Taihu Lake basins, the shelterbelts for comprehensive control in the Pearl River basin, the shelterbelts for comprehensive control in the Liaohe River basin, and the shelterbelts along the middle reaches of the Yellow River. Currently, the ``three norths'' shelterbelts project has finished its first and second phases, resulting in a newly afforested area of 18.51 million hectares and increasing the forest cover from 5.05 to 8.2 percent. This project has turned more than 40,000 sq km of barren land into green land and more than 1.3 million hectares of desert land into farmland, pastures and orchards. Twelve percent of the total desertified land has been worked on, and 10 percent of it has been brought under control, more than 11 million hectares of farmland have been protected by forest networks, while 8.93 million hectares of grassland have been restored, resulting in a 20-odd percent increase in grass output. The agricultural eco-environment in one third of the counties covered by the ``three norths'' project has entered a benign circle. The shelterbelts project along the upper and middle reaches of the Yangtze River has yielded a total of more than 5.46 million hectares of newly planted forest in seven years. A grand total of 1.6 million hectares of forest has appeared since coastal shelterbelts project was launched in an all-round way in 1991, which basically covers the 18,000-kilometer-long coastline. A total of 769 counties or cities covered by the plain farmland shelterbelts have reached their tree-planting goals, accounting for 84 percent of the total 918 counties in the plain areas. The Taihang Mountains afforestation project has already produced a total of 1.02 million hectares of afforested area since it was launched in 1994. 

这些大规模的林业生态工程建设，使中国相当部分地区的生态环境逐步得到改善。
The above large-scale eco-system construction projects have gradually improved the eco-environment in a considerable number of areas.

草地建设取得阶段性成果。
Grassland construction has made progress in the phasal sense. 
根据《草原法》规定，中国各级政府加强对草地资源的保护与管理，严禁乱垦滥挖滥牧，实行国家、集体、个人相结合的形式，加大了草场建设和治理草地沙化、退化的力度。据统计，全国飞播种草和人工改良草场累计面积达１１７５.７万公顷，草地围栏８３３.３万公顷。国家重点组织开展的４９个草地牧业综合示范工程取得巨大成效，到１９９４年底，累计完成人工种草５６３.８万公顷，为干旱、荒漠、水土流失严重地区发展畜牧业以及生态环境保护开辟了一条新路。
The protection and management of grassland resources is reinforced by governments at all levels in line with the Grassland Law, and activities such as unauthorized reclamation, excessive digging and overgrazing are forbidden. With the combined efforts of the state, the collective and individ"iuals, grassland construction and control over grassland desertification and deterioration have been strengthened. According to statistics, the total area of artificially sown grass and improved meadows has reached 11.757 million hectares, and that of fenced meadows, 8.333 million hectares. The 49 key comprehensive demonstration projects for grassland stockbreeding constructed by the state have made great achievements. By the end of 1994 a total of 5.638 million hectares of artificially sown grass had been completed, which has blazed a new trail for developing animal husbandry and ecological environmental protection in the areas with arid and desertified land and those with serious soil erosion.

海洋环境保护得到加强。
Marine environmental protection has been strengthened. 
中国拥有辽阔的海域，海洋环境保护是中国环境保护工作的一个重要组成部分。
Marine environmental protection is a major component of China's environmental protection efforts, as the country has a vast maritime territory. 
目前，中国已颁布了一系列海洋环境保护的法律法规，建立了全国海洋环境监测监视网络，完成了近岸海域环境功能区划，对近岸海域的建设项目、海洋石油勘探开发和海洋倾废活动实施了有效的环境管理，较好地控制了海洋污染和资源破坏，开展了防治赤潮、保护近海渔业资源等工作，到１９９５年底，建立了１４处各类国家级海洋自然保护区，中国管辖的大部分海域水质及周围海域生态环境基本保持良好状态。
A series of laws and regulations concerning marine environmental protection has been published, and a nationwide marine environment monitoring network has been set up. Coastal waters have been divided up into zones for administration and effective environmental management is practiced for offshore construction projects, offshore petroleum exploitation and wastes disposal so that marine pollution and resources destruction are taken well in hand, and efforts have been made to prevent ``red tide'' and protect offshore fishery resources. By the end of 1995 14 national-level marine nature reserves had been set up. The water quality in most of China's maritime zones and the surrounding ecological environment have been basically kept in good condition.

长期以来，中国政府在生物多样性保护方面进行了不懈的努力，制定了《中国自然保护纲要》、《中国生物多样性保护行动计划》，确定了生物多样性保护的方针、战略以及重点领域和优先项目。
The Chinese government has for a long time made unremitting efforts for biodiversity conservation, formulating the China Program for Nature Conservation and China's Action Plan for the Conservation of Biodiversi"ity, containing the policy, strategy and key fields and priority projects for biodiversity conservation.

中国的生物多样性保护采取就地保护和迁地保护相结合的途径。目前，中国已有６１２种国家级珍稀濒危动植物被列为重点保护对象，其中野生动物２５８个种和种群、植物３５４种；６０多种珍稀濒危野生动物人工繁殖成功；麋鹿、野马、高鼻羚羊等动物经引种繁殖已初步得到恢复。
China has adopted the on-site conservation and off-site preservation methods to protect biodiversity. Currently, there are 612 national-level rare and endangered species of flora and fauna listed as key protection species, including 258 species of wild animals and 354 species of plants. Artificial reproduction has been successfully implemented for more than 60 species of rare and endangered wild animals, and through propagation, such species as David's deer, wild horse and saiga tatarica have been re-introduced.

建立自然保护区是就地保护野生动植物的最有效措施。
Establishing nature reserves is the most effective method for the in situ conservation of wild plants and animals. 
到１９９５年底，中国已建成类型比较齐全的自然保护区７９９处，面积达７１８５万公顷，约占国土总面积的７.１９％。国家级自然保护区有９９处，其中加入国际人与生物圈保护区网的自然保护区有１０处，包括：吉林长白山、四川卧龙、贵州梵净山、湖北神农架、福建武夷山、新疆博格达峰、广东鼎湖山、内蒙古锡林郭勒、江苏盐城和云南西双版纳自然保护区。黑龙江扎龙、吉林向海、江西鄱阳湖、湖南东洞庭湖、青海鸟岛和海南东寨港等６处自然保护区被列为国际重要湿地。目前，全国设立风景名胜区５１２处，总面积９６０万公顷，其中国家级风景名胜区１１９处，省级风景名胜区２５６处，市（县）级风景名胜区１３７处。建立森林公园７１０处，其中国家级森林公园２４８处。黄山、武陵源、九寨沟、黄龙等风景名胜区被联合国教科文组织列为世界自然与文化遗产。
By the end of 1995 799 nature reserves of rather diversified types, covering a total area of 71.85 million hectares (or 7.19 percent of China's territory) had been established in China. There are 99 national-level reserves, of which ten -- Jilin's Changbai Mountains, Sichuan's Wolong, Guizhou's Fanjing Mountains, Hubei's Shennongjia, Fujian's Wuyi Mountains, Xinjiang's Mt. Bogda, Guangdong's Dinghu Mountains, Inner Mongolia's Xilingol, Jiangsu's Yancheng and Yunnan's Xishuangbanna -- have been listed in the International Network of Men and Biosphere Reserves. Another six nature reserves -- Zhalong in Heilongjiang, Xianghai in Jilin, Boyang Lake in Jiangxi, East Dongting Lake in Hunan, Bird Island in Qinghai and Dongzhai Harbor in Hainan -- have been included in the list of the world's important wetlands. At present, a total of 512 historic and scenic sites has been designated, of which 119 are at the national level, 256 at the provincial level and 137 at the city or county level, covering a total area of 9.6 million hectares. Forest parks total 710, of which 248 are at the national level. Scenic spots at Huangshan Mountain, Wulingyuan, Jiuzhaigou and Huanglong are listed as parts of the world natural and cultural heritage by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 
自然保护区的建立，使一批具有代表性、典型性、科学研究价值的自然生态系统和珍稀濒危物种得到有效保护。
The establishment of nature reserves has put a number of representative and typical natural eco-systems with scientific research value as well as rare and endangered species under effective protection.

建立动物园、植物园及各种引种繁育中心（基地）是迁地保护野生动植物的有效措施。到１９９５年底，中国共建动物园和公园动物展区１７５个、各种野生动物繁殖中心（场）２２７个，建立大型植物园６０多个、野生植物引种保存基地２５５个，使大熊猫、扬子鳄、中华鲟、白豚、东北虎、朱、银杉、珙桐、苏铁、金花茶等珍稀濒危动植物得到保护。此外，中国还建立了１０多个标本馆、１个基因库和２个野生动物细胞库，为遗传多样性的研究和保存打下良好的基础。中国政府严禁犀牛角、虎骨等的药用和贸易，对乱捕滥猎珍稀野生动物的犯罪行为，实行严厉打击的政策。

Establishing zoological gardens, botanical gardens and various artificial breeding centers is an effective method for off-site preservation of various species of wild animals and plants. By the end of 1995 China had set up 175 zoological gardens and zoological exhibition sites in public parks, 227 artificial breeding centers for wild animals, more than 60 large botanical gardens and 255 wild plant gene and cell banks to ensure the continuation of rare and endangered species of plants and animals, including the giant panda, Chinese alligator, Chinese sturgeon, white-flag dolphin, Manchurian tiger, crested ibis, Cathay silver fir, dovetree, Cycas revoluta and camellia chrysantha tuyama. In addition, China has established some dozen specimen centers, one gene bank and two cell banks for wild animals, which have helped genetic polymorphism research and preservation work. The medicinal use of and trade in rhinoceros horn and tigerbone are strictly prohibited by the government, and the illegal hunting of rare wild animals is severely punished by law.

中国政府重视家畜禽遗传资源和农作物种质资源保护。
The government has placed much stress on the preservation of the genetic materials from domestic animals and fowls, as well as germ plasma resources from crops. 
中国有家畜禽品种、类群５９６个，其中土著家畜禽品种（类群）占品种总数的７０％以上。中国政府安排专项保护经费，对一些濒危和数量急剧下降的家畜禽品种进行优先保护，并建立了１座畜禽牧草种质基因库。到１９９５年底，中国已初步形成农作物种质资源保存体系，建成国家级贮存种子长期库及复份库各１座，地方中期库２３座，国家级田间种质圃２５个，其中试管苗圃种质库２个。目前，中国大多数农作物种质资源得到了保护，现已收集到各种农作物种质３３万份，其中对３０万份种质材料进行了原份和复份保存。
There are 596 species of livestock and poultry in China, of which over 70 percent are native species. The government has appropriated special funds for preservation of some endangered or sharply diminishing species of livestock and poultry and established a germ plasma gene bank for livestock forage grass. China had initially formed a preservation system for germ plasma resources from crops, including one national germ plasma bank for long-term preservation and a duplicate one, 23 local germ plasma banks for mid-term preservation, and 25 national germ plasma nurseries, of which two are for test-tube culture. The germ plasma resources of most agricultural plants in China are preserved, including 330,000 specimens of germ plasma for various species of crops, of which 300,000 have duplicates.

中国政府十分重视西藏地区的环境保护。
The government also attaches great importance to the environmental protection of the Tibet Autonomous Region. 
现在，西藏地区的环境质量保持了良好状态，大气环境质量达到国家环境质量一级标准，主要江河湖泊水质均优于国家地面水环境质量标准。森林和草原得到了有效保护，森林面积达７１７万公顷，活立木蓄积量２０.８４亿立方米，草原面积达８２０７万公顷，其中可利用草地７０７７万公顷。海拔４７００米的纳木错“天湖”，成为天鹅、鹭鸶、沙鸥等珍贵水禽的天然栖息地。
The environmental quality in Tibet today has been kept in an excellent condition. The atmospheric environment there has attained the state's first-level quality and the water quality of major rivers and lakes is also higher than the national standard for the surface waters environmental quality. Forests and grasslands are under effective preservation. The forest area in Tibet totals 7.17 million hectares and the stumpage, 2.084 billion cubic meters. The total grassland area amounts to 82.07 million hectares, of which 70.77 million hectares are usable. With an elevation of 4,700 meters, Namco Lake has become a natural habitat for rare water birds like swans, egrets and sand birds.

从总体上看，中国森林面积少、草场退化、水土流失、土地荒漠化和珍稀濒危野生动植物保护等问题依然存在，因此，进一步加强生态环境与生物多样性的保护仍然是中国政府一项十分重要的任务。
Viewed overall, however, many problems still exist -- the shortage of the forest area, grassland degradation, soil erosion, desertification and difficulties in the protection of rare and endangered species of wild animals and plants. Thus, the further strengthening of the preservation of the ecological environment and biodiversity remains an important task for the Chinese government to tackle.

环境科学技术和环境宣传教育

Environmental Science and Technology, and Environmental Publicity and Education

中国实施“科教兴国”战略，积极推动环境科学技术的发展，取得了初步成效。
Through adopting the strategy of ``relying on science and education to rejuvenate the nation,'' China has made certain achievements in actively accelerating the development of environmental science and technology, as follows:

环境科学技术研究领域不断拓展。
The research spectrum of environmental science and technology has been steadily broadened. 
中国的环境科学技术工作开始于７０年代，作为科技工作的重要组成部分，环境科学技术工作得到了国家的重视。
Research into environmental science and technology in China began in the 1970s. As an important part of scientific and technological work, it is put in a position of importance by the government. 
针对一些重大环境科研课题，中国政府制定了环境保护科研规划和计划，组织力量进行科技攻关。开展了区域环境污染综合防治、环境背景值和环境容量、污染治理技术及全球环境问题的研究。取得了北京市环境污染综合防治研究、大气环境容量研究、全国主要土壤背景值与环境容量研究、酸沉降及其影响和控制技术研究、全球气候变化预测影响和对策研究、洁净煤及大气污染控制技术研究等一大批科技成果。同时，还开展了区域环境影响评价、环境管理与环境经济、环境监测技术及仪器设备、自然生态保护、环境与人体健康等多方面的研究，为环境管理、污染防治和生态保护提供了科学依据和技术支持。
For some major environmental research subjects the Chinese government has formulated corresponding research programs and plans for environmental protection while organizing forces to tackle key scientific and technological problems. Besides, China has expanded its research into comprehensive prevention and control of regional environmental pollution, environmental background values and environmental capacity, pollution control technology and global environmental problems. As a result, the country has made substantial scientific and technological achievements in some research areas, such as the comprehensive prevention and control of Beijing's environmental pollution, the capacity of the atmospheric environment, the background value and environmental capacity of the nation's major soils, acid deposition and its impact and control, the forecasting and monitoring of the influence of the changes in the global climate and corresponding countermeasures, the depollution of coal, and the control of air pollution. China has also developed research in such fields as regional environ"imen tal impact assessment, environmental management and environmental economy, environmental monitoring technology and equipment, the protection of natural ecology, and the relationship between the environment and people's health. This provides scientific basis and technological support for environmental management, the prevention and control of pollution, and ecological protection.

环境保护科研机构和研究队伍不断壮大。到１９９５年底，全国共建立环境保护科学研究机构３９０个，拥有科技与管理人员２万多人，初步形成了由中国科学院、行业主管部门、高等院校和环保部门组成的学科齐全的环境保护科研体系。
The numbers of research institutes and personnel engaged in environmental protection have been steadily increased. By the end of 1995 some 390 scientific research bodies engaged in environmental protection had been established nationwide, staffed by more than 20,000 research and managerial personnel. A comprehensive scientific research system composed of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, competent departments of different trades, colleges and universities, and the environmental protection departments is basically in place.

组织环境保护最佳实用技术筛选、评价和推广工作。最佳实用技术的推广是加速环境科技成果转化，形成现实污染防治能力的重要措施。“八五”期间，全国共推荐１３１６项实用技术，筛选出４３８项最佳实用技术，其中３８５项在１４万个单位得到了应用，减少了“三废”的排放，并取得了良好的经济效益。
Work regarding the screening, evaluation and popularization of the optimum and practical technology for environmental protection has been organized. The popularization of the optimum and practical technology is an important measure to expedite the transformation of environmental scientific and technological achievements into the capability of actual pollution prevention and control. During the Eighth Five-Year Plan period, 1,316 kinds of practical technology were recommended nationwide, and 438 of them were appraised as the optimum items of practical technology. Among them, 385 kinds have been put into use in 140,000 units, resulting in reduced emission of the ``three wastes'' and excellent economic returns.

扶植环境保护产业的发展。环保产业是包括技术开发、产品生产、商品流通、资源利用、信息服务及工程承包的新兴产业。中国把环保产业列入优先发展领域，提出了“积极扶植、调整结构、依靠科技、提高质量、面向市场、优质服务”的指导思想，在投资、价格、税收等方面给予优惠政策，鼓励环保产业的发展。１９９６年５月发布的全国环保产业基本情况调查表明，中国从事环保产业的单位８６５１个，从业人员１８８.２０万人，固定资产４５０.１１亿元，年生产总值３１１.４８亿元，创利润４０.９１亿元。
The development of the environmental protection industry has been fostered. This newly emerging industry involves the development of technology, manufacturing of products, circulation of commodities, utilization of resources, provision of information, and undertaking of contracted projects. China gives priority to the development of the environmental protection industry, with the guidelines of ``actively fostering, adjusting the structure, relying on science and technology, improving quality, orienting to the market and providing excellent services.'' Preferential policies are given to investment, prices, taxes, etc., to encourage the development of the environmental protection industry. A general survey of the nation's environmental protection industry, the results of which were made public in May 1996, shows that there are 8,651 units engaged in the environmental protection industry, which is staffed by 1.882 million people and boasts 45.011 billion yuan worth of fixed assets, an annual output value of 31.148 billion yuan and 4.091 billion yuan in profits.

环境标志进入实施阶段。
The development of environmental labels has entered the stage of implementation. 
１９９３年３月，中国开始实施环境标志计划，到１９９６年４月，在１１类产品中开展了环境标志认证工作，已有２１家企业的３５种产品获得了中国环境标志。伴随着环境标志产品进入千家万户，环境标志的社会影响越来越大。
In March 1993 China began to carry out a plan for environment labelling. By April 1996 the environmental label certification work had been developed in 11 categories of products, and 35 kinds of products from 21 enterprises had been awarded environmental labels. As the environmentally-labelled products enter millions of households the environmental label will exert a growing influence in society.

中国政府把搞好环境宣传教育，增强全民族环境意识作为一项战略任务。
The Chinese government regards it a strategic task to actively develop environmental publicity and education and to raise the nation's consciousness about the importance of environmental protection.

普及环保知识，增强环境意识，逐步形成良好的环境道德风尚。７０年代，中国翻译和编写了一批环境保护科普读物，广泛介绍环保知识，起到了很好的启蒙作用。８０年代以来，每年的“世界环境日”、“植树节”、“爱鸟周”等，全国各地都组织大规模的宣传活动。近年来，中国新闻媒介进一步加强了对环境保护的宣传报道，报纸、电台、电视台经常有大量的环境保护节目，新闻媒介还对一些污染严重的地区和单位进行了报道。从１９９３年开始，以组织新闻单位采访环境执法情况为主要形式的“中华环保世纪行”活动，在全国引起了巨大的反响，促进了一批重大环境问题的解决。与此同时，各省、市也相继开展了本地区的“世纪行”活动。３年来，全国共有７５０家新闻单位，１５００多名记者参加了采访报道活动，编发各类稿件１万多篇，仅电视新闻就达１６００多条。
China strives to popularize environmental protection knowledge among the people and raise their consciousness about environmental protection and gradually to cultivate fine environmental ethics and codes of conduct. As early as in the 1970s, popular science textbooks on environmental protection were compiled or translated into Chinese to widely introduce environmental protection knowledge and enlighten the people on such knowledge. Since the 1980s large-scale publicity activities have been organized all over the country every year on World Environment Day, Tree Planting Day, Love the Birds Week, etc. In recent years the Chinese media has been further promoting publicity and reports on environmental protection. Virtually all newspapers, radio and TV stations frequently offer environmental protection programs, and, in particular, the media pays special attention to severely polluted areas and units. Since 1993 the media's ``China Trans-century Environmental Protection Inspection Campaign,'' centered on news about environmental law enforcement, has aroused a nationwide responce and accelerated the solution to a number of major environmental problems. Meanwhile, the various provinces and cities have also developed such activities. In the past three years, 1,500 journalists from 750 news units have participated in these activities, engendering more than 10,000 news articles. Of these, television news items alone accounted for 1,600.

　　１９８３年，中国创办了全球第一家国家级环境保护专业报《中国环境报》，年发行量近３０万份。１９８０年成立了中国环境科学出版社，到１９９５年出版各类环境图书８６０种，５００多万册。１９９０年《中国环境年鉴》出版，并从１９９４年开始出版英文版。中国还有３０多家地方环境报和数百种环境专业期刊。

In 1983 China established the first national-level professional newspaper on environmental protection in the world -- the China Environment News, with an annual circulation of nearly 300,000 copies. In 1980 the China Environmental Science Press was established. By 1995 it had published over five million copies of books of 860 titles on the environment. Since 1990 the China Environment Yearbook has been published, and its English version also published since 1994. Besides, there are more than 30 local environmental newspapers and several hundred professional periodicals.

　　中国动员全社会广泛参与环境宣传教育活动，近年来，环保部门、教育部门、文化部门、新闻单位、妇女组织、青年组织、科学协会、学会等都组织开展了各具特色的环境宣传教育活动。

The Chinese government encourages the whole of society to participate in environmental publicity and education activities. In recent years the environmental protection departments, educational departments, cultural departments, news units, organizations for women and youth, scientific associations and academic societies have all developed their own environmental publicity and educational activities, highlighted by the following aspects:

环境专业教育为环保事业输送大批科技与管理人才。中国已有北京大学、清华大学、中国人民大学、北京师范大学、南京大学、同济大学、武汉大学等１４０所高等院校设置了环境类系或专业，共有本科专业点２０６个。国务院学位委员会批准环境类５１个专业、２２３个硕士学位授予单位，３９个专业、７７个博士学位授予单位和若干个博士后流动站。４０多所中等专业学校和上百所职业高中也设置了环境专业。２０多年来，中国的环境专业教育培养的大批专业人才成为环保领域中的一支有生力量。
Higher education has provided a great number of scientific, technological and managerial personnel for environ"imen tal protection work. A total of 140 colleges and universities, including Beijing University, Qinghua University, the People's University of China, Beijing Normal University, Nanjing University, Tongji University and Wuhan University, all have departments of or majors in environmental studies, with a total of 206 units having the authority of awarding bachelor's degrees. Approved by the Academic Degrees Committee under the State Council, there are 223 units granting master's degrees in 51 majors concerning the environment, 77 units granting doctorates in 39 majors, and several postdoctorate positions. Furthermore, more than 40 specialized secondary schools and over 100 vocational high schools also offer environmental courses. Over the past 20 years, large numbers of specialists trained by China's professional environmental education have become a significant force in the environmental protection field.

环境在职教育提高了环境管理人员的素质。１９８１年，中国成立了中国环境管理干部学院，对全国环保系统的管理人员进行岗位培训、继续教育和学历教育，到１９９５年底结业学员５２００多人，这些学员经培训后水平有了很大提高，为推动各地环保工作发挥了重要作用。此外，各地区、各有关部门也从工作需要出发，举办了各种类型的环保培训班、研讨班，据统计，１０多年来共举办上万次各类培训班，培训人员达４０多万人次。
On-the-job training has enhanced the quality of environmental managerial personnel. In 1981 the Environmental Administrative Personnel Training College was established for the purpose of offering on-the-job training, continuing education and academic-level education to administrative personnel in the environmental protection departments throughout the country. By the end of 1995 over 5,200 trainees had completed courses there. These skill-enhanced trainees are playing an important role in promoting the nation's environmental protection work. Moreover, proceeding from the actual needs, various types of environmental training classes and symposiums have been held by various localities and departments concerned. Statistics show that over the past decade, more than 10,000 training classes have been held attended by over 400, 000 persons.

环境基础教育培养和提高了青少年及儿童的环境意识。近年来，各地普遍开展了中小学和幼儿园的环境教育，培养孩子们从小热爱大自然的优良品质和保护环境的责任感。
Basic environmental education has cultivated and enhanced young people's environmental consciousness. In recent years, environmental education has been offered in high schools, primary schools and kindergartens throughout the country to cultivate the children's loving-the-nature quality and sense of responsibility for environmental protection.

中国人口众多，文化教育事业还不够发达，全民族的环境意识有待进一步提高，搞好环境宣传教育是一项长期而艰巨的任务。
China is a populous country with underdeveloped education and the nation's consciousness about the environment remains to be further enhanced. Therefore, it will be a long-term, arduous task to do well in environmental publicity and education in China.

积极推动环境保护领域的国际合作

Taking Vigorous Action to Promote International Cooperation in Environmental Protection

中国一贯主张：经济发展必须与环境保护相协调；保护环境是全人类的共同任务，但是经济发达国家负有更大的责任；加强国际合作要以尊重国家主权为基础；保护环境和发展离不开世界的和平与稳定；处理环境问题应当兼顾各国现实的实际利益和世界的长远利益。
China consistently holds that economic development should be coordinated with environmental protection; protection of the environment is a common task for mankind, but the economically developed countries should take more responsibility in this respect. It always maintains that the strengthening of international cooperation should be based on respecting national sovereignty, the protection of the environment and the spurring of development can not be done without peace and stability in the world, and both practical interests of various countries and long-term interests of the world should be considered in handling environmental problems.

　　中国在采取一系列措施解决本国环境问题的同时，积极务实地参与环境保护领域的国际合作，为保护全球环境这一人类共同事业进行了不懈的努力。

While a series of measures for solving its own environmental problems are being taken China has participated, actively and in a practical manner, in international cooperation in the environmental protection field and made sustained efforts to promote global environmental protection as a common task of mankind.

　　中国支持并积极参与联合国系统开展的环境事务。中国是历届联合国环境署的理事国，与联合国环境署进行了卓有成效的合作。中国于１９７９年加入了联合国环境署的“全球环境监测网”、“国际潜在有毒化学品登记中心”和“国际环境情报资料源查询系统”。１９８７年，联合国环境署在中国兰州设立了“国际沙漠化治理研究培训中心”总部。在环境署的组织下，中国将防治沙漠化、建设生态农业的经验和技术传授到许多国家。到１９９６年，中国已有１８个单位和个人被联合国环境署授予“全球５００佳”称号。中国与联合国开发署、世界银行、亚洲开发银行等国际组织建立了良好的合作关系。目前，中国在《关于消耗臭氧层物质的蒙特利尔议定书》多边基金、全球环境基金、世界银行、亚洲开发银行贷款的使用和管理上，已经建立起有效的合作模式，对推动中国的污染防治和环境管理能力建设发挥了积极作用。中国是１９９３年成立的联合国可持续发展委员会的成员国，在这个全球环境与发展领域的高层政治论坛中一直发挥着建设性作用。中国与联合国亚太经社会等组织保持了密切的合作关系，并通过参加东北亚地区环境合作、西北太平洋行动计划、东亚海洋行动计划协调体等，对亚太地区的环境与发展作出了贡献。

China supports and actively participates in the environmental activities launched by the UN organizations. China has been a member state of the successive UN Environment Program Governing Council and fruitful cooperation has been carried out between China and the UNEP. In 1979 China joined the UNEP's ``Global Environment Monitoring System,'' ``International Registry of Potentially Toxic Chemicals'' and ``International Environmental Information System.'' In 1987 a head-office for research and training in international desertification control was established by the UNEP in Lanzhou, capital of northwest China's Gansu Province. China has passed its experiences and techniques on controlling desertification and building ecological agriculture on to many countries through the UNEP. By 1996 a total of 18 units or persons in China had won the ``Global 500'' title awarded by the UNEP. Good cooperative relationships have been forged between China and the UN Development Program, the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and other international organizations. At present, an effective mode of cooperation for the use and management of multilateral funds of the Montreal Protocol on Substances That Deplete the Ozone Layer and the Global Environmental Facility as well as loans from the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank has been established. This has played an active role in promoting prevention and control of China's pollution and in improving environmental management ability. China is a member of the UN Committee on Sustainable Development, set up in 1993, and has played a constructive role in this high-level political forum on the global environment and development. China has kept a close cooperative relationship with the UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and other relevant organizations, and has made contributions to environmental causes and the development of the Asian and Pacific regions through participating in the Northeast Asia environmental cooperation, the Northwest Pacific Action Plan, and the Regional Coordinating Unit for the East Asian Seas Action Plan.

　　中国积极发展环境保护领域的双边合作。１０多年来，中国先后与美国、朝鲜、加拿大、印度、韩国、日本、蒙古、俄罗斯、德国、澳大利亚、乌克兰、芬兰、挪威、丹麦、荷兰等国家签订了环境保护双边合作协定或谅解备忘录。在环境规划与管理、全球环境问题、污染控制与预防、森林和野生动植物保护、海洋环境、气候变化、大气污染、酸雨、污水处理等方面进行了交流与合作，取得了一批重要成果。中国还参加了美国倡议的“有益于环境的全球性学习与观察计划”活动。

China has actively developed bilateral cooperation in the field of environmental protection. Over the past ten-odd years China has successively signed bilateral environmental protection cooperation agreements and memorandums of understanding with the United States, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Canada, India, the Republic of Korea, Japan, Mongolia, Russia, Germany, Australia, Ukraine, Finland, Norway, Denmark, and the Netherlands. Exchanges and cooperation have been carried out in environmental planning and management, global environment problems, pollution control and pre"ivention, protection of forests and wild animals and plants, marine environment, climate change, air pollution, acid rain and sewage disposal and important achievements have been made in these respects. China has also taken part in the Global Learning and Observation to Benefit the Environment, as proposed by the United States.

　　中国为进一步加强在环境与发展领域的国际合作，１９９２年４月成立了“中国环境与发展国际合作委员会”。该委员会由４０多位中外著名专家和社会知名人士组成，负责向中国政府提出有关咨询意见和建议。该委员会已在能源与环境、生物多样性保护、生态农业建设、资源核算和价格体系、公众参与、环境法律法规等方面提出了具体而有价值的建议，得到中国政府的重视和响应。

In order to promote further international cooperation in the environment and development field, China set up the China Council for International Cooperation on Environment and Development in April 1992, composed of more than 40 leading specialists and well-known public figures from China and other countries, to be responsible for submitting propo"isals and advisory opinions to the Chinese government. The Council has put forward valuable concrete proposals on energy and the environment, biodiversity protection, ecological agriculture, resources accounting and the pricing system, public participation and the implementation of the environment laws and regulations, which have aroused the attention and response of the Chinese government.

　　中国积极参与筹备并出席了联合国环境与发展大会，为大会的顺利召开作出了努力。中国参加了联合国环境与发展大会的历次筹备会议，在讨论和谈判国际环境公约时发挥了建设性的作用。１９９１年６月，在北京召开了由中国发起４１个发展中国家参加的环境与发展部长级会议，会议发表的《北京宣言》阐述了发展中国家在环境与发展问题上的原则立场，对大会筹备作出实质性的贡献。根据联合国环境与发展大会筹委会第一次会议的要求，中国编写了《中华人民共和国环境与发展报告》，全面论述了中国环境与发展的现状，提出了中国实现环境与经济协调发展的战略措施，阐明了中国对全球环境问题的原则立场，受到了国际社会的好评。１９９２年６月，中国国务委员、国务院环境保护委员会主任宋健率领中国政府代表团出席了联合国环境与发展大会，中国总理李鹏出席了大会的首脑会议并发表了重要讲话，提出了加强环境与发展领域国际合作的主张，得到了国际社会的积极评价。李鹏总理还代表中国政府率先签署了《气候变化框架公约》和《生物多样性公约》，对会议产生了积极的影响。

China took an active part in the preparations for and in attending the UN Conference on Environment and Development. It made great efforts for the smooth convening of the Conference. China has taken part in all the preparatory meetings of the Conference and played a constructive role in discussions and negotiations concerning international environment conventions. In June 1991 the Ministerial Conference of Developing Countries on Environment and Development, proposed by China and held in Beijing, was participated in by 41 developing countries, and the Beijing Declaration published by it set forth the principled stand of the developing countries on environment and development, making substantial contributions to the preparation of the UN Conference. In line with the requirements of the first meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the UN Conference on Environment and Development, China worked out the Report on the Environment and Development of the People's Republic of China, which gave an overall exposition on the current situation of China's environment and development, put forward strategic measures for coordinated development of China's environment and economy and set forth China's principled stand on the problems of the global environment, which have received favorable comments from the international community. In June 1992 Song Jian, state councilor and director of the Environmental Protection Commission of the State Council, led a delegation from the Chinese government to the UN Conference on Environment and Development. China's Premier Li Peng was present at the summit meeting of the Conference and made an important speech proposing the strengthening of international cooperation in the field of environment and development, winning positive comments from the international community. On behalf of the Chinese government, Li Peng took the lead in signing the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Convention on Biological Diver"isity, exerting a positive influence on the meeting.

　　中国自１９７９年起先后签署了《濒危野生动植物种国际贸易公约》、《国际捕鲸管制公约》、《关于保护臭氧层的维也纳公约》、《关于控制危险废物越境转移及其处置的巴赛尔公约》、《关于消耗臭氧层物质的蒙特利尔议定书（修订本）》、《气候变化框架公约》、《生物多样性公约》、《防治荒漠化公约》、《关于特别是作为水禽栖息地的国际重要湿地公约》、《１９７２年伦敦公约》等一系列国际环境公约和议定书。

Since 1979 China has signed a series of international environmental conventions and agreements, including the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer, Basel Convention on Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, Montreal Protocol on Substances That Deplete the Ozone Layer (revised version), Framework Convention on Climate Change, Convention on Biological Diversity, Convention on Combating Desertification, Convention on Wetlands of International Importance Especially as Waterfowl Habitat, and 1972 London Convention.

　　中国对已经签署、批准和加入的国际环境公约和协议，一贯严肃认真地履行自己所承担的责任。在《中国２１世纪议程》的框架指导下，编制了《中国环境保护２１世纪议程》、《中国生物多样性保护行动计划》、《中国２１世纪议程林业行动计划》、《中国海洋２１世纪议程》等重要文件以及国家方案或行动计划，认真履行所承诺的义务。中国政府批准《中国消耗臭氧层物质逐步淘汰国家方案》，提出了淘汰受控物质计划和政策框架，采取措施控制或禁止消耗臭氧层物质的生产和扩大使用。１９９４年７月，在联合国开发署的支持下，中国政府在北京成功地举办了“中国２１世纪议程高级国际圆桌会议”，为推动中国的可持续发展作出了贡献。１９９５年１１月，中国发布了《关于坚决严格控制境外废物转移到我国的紧急通知》，１９９６年３月又颁布了《废物进口环境保护管理暂行规定》，依法防止废物进口污染环境。

China always conscientiously carries out its responsibilities for international environmental conventions and agreements which it has signed, approved or joined. Under the guidance of China's Agenda 21, in order to conscientiously undertake its promised duties China has worked out some important documents and state programs or action plans, including the 21st Century Agenda on Environmental Protection, Action Plan for the Conservation of Biodiversity, Action Plan for Forestry in the 21st Century Agenda, and the 21st Century Marine Agenda. The Chinese government approved the State Plan for Gradually Eliminating Sub"istances That Deplete the Ozone Layer which put forward a plan and policy framework for eliminating controlled materials as well as measures for controlling or banning the production and extensive use of substances which deplete the ozone layer. In July 1994, with the support of the UN Development Program, the Chinese government successfully held in Beijing the High-level International Round-Table Conference on Agenda 21, which contributed to the promotion of the nation's sustainable development. To provide legal basis for preventing environmental pollution by the importation of wastes, in November 1995 China published the Emergency Announcement on Strictly Controlling Trans-Boundary Movement of Wastes to China, and in March 1996 it published the Provisional Regulations on Environmental Protection and Management of Wastes' Importation.

中国的粮食问题
The Grain Issue in China  

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China

一九九六年十月·北京
October 1996, Beijing 


目 录
Contents

新中国解决了人民的吃饭问题　
New China Has Solved the Problem of Feeding Its People

未来中国的粮食消费需求 　　
 Prospects for China's Consumption Demand for Grain

中国能够依靠自己的力量实现粮食基本自给
 China Can Basically Achieve Self-Sufficiency in Grain Through Self-Reliance

努力改善生产条件，千方百计提高粮食综合生产能力
 Striving to Improve Production Conditionsto Increase the Comprehensive Grain Production Ability

推进科教兴农，转变粮食增长方式
 Developing Agriculture by Relying on Science, Technology and Education and Changing the Grain Increase Method

综合开发利用和保护国土资源，实现农业可持续发展
 Comprehensively Developing, Utilizing and Protecting Land Resources for the Sustainable Development of Agriculture

深化体制改革，创造粮食生产、流通的良好政策环境 
 Deepening Structural Reform and Creating a Favorable Policy Environment for Grain Production and Circulation
 


　　中国政府一向十分重视粮食问题。中国有12亿多人口，是粮食生产与消费大国。中国的粮食状况如何？中国的粮食生产潜力有多大？中国人民能不能养活自己？中国将如何发展粮食生产？是人们普遍关心的问题。中国政府经过科学论证，现就这些问题作出实事求是的回答。
The Chinese government has always attached great importance to the grain issue. With a population of more than 1.2 billion, China is a major grain producer as well as a major grain consumer. What is the food situation in China? What is the country's grain production potential? Can the Chinese people feed themselves? And how will China improve its grain production? Through scientific analysis the Chinese government, in the manner of seeking truth from facts, now addresses these questions of universal concern as follows:

新中国解决了人民的吃饭问题
New China Has Solved the Problem of Feeding Its People

饥饿始终是半殖民地、半封建的旧中国的一大难题。
The semi-colonial and semi-feudal old China before Liberation in 1949 was perennially haunted by the specter of starvation. 
旧中国的农业发展水平极为低下，有80%的人口长期处于饥饿半饥饿状态，遇有自然灾害，更是饿殍遍地。
For long periods of time in the old days 80 percent of the population suffered from starvation or semi-starvation because of the extreme backwardness of agricultural production. Natural disasters nearly always resulted in widespread deaths from starvation.
1949年新中国成立时，全国每公顷粮食产量只有１０３５公斤，人均粮食占有量仅为２１０公斤。
In 1949 when the People's Republic of China was founded, the national grain yield per hectare was only 1,035 kg, and the per capita share of grain was only 210 kg a year.

　　中华人民共和国建立后，政府废除了封建土地所有制，带领人民自力更生，奋发图强，大力发展粮食生产，用占世界７％左右的耕地，养活了占世界２２％的人口。１９９５年与１９４９年相比，粮食总产量增长了３倍多，年均递增３．１％。目前，中国粮食总产量位居世界第一，人均３８０公斤左右（含豆类、薯类），达到世界平均水平。人均肉类产量４１公斤、水产品２１公斤、禽蛋１４公斤、水果３５公斤、蔬菜１９８公斤，均超过世界平均水平。据联合国粮农组织统计，在八十年代世界增产的谷物中，中国占３１％的份额。中国发展粮食生产所取得的巨大成就，不仅使人民的温饱问题基本解决，生活水平逐步提高，而且为在全球范围内消除饥饿与贫困作出了重大贡献。
After the founding of the People's Republic, the feudal ownership of land was abolished. Under the leadership of their government, the Chinese people devoted themselves to developing grain production through self-reliance and hard work. As a result, China is now able to feed 22 percent of the world's population on about seven percent of the world's cultivated land. Total grain output in 1995 more than quadrupled the 1949 figure, or an average increase of 3.1 percent a year. At present, China ranks first in total grain output in the world, with the per capita share of grain reaching approximately 380 kg (including legume and tuber crops), which is the global average. The per capita production of meat, aquatic products, eggs, fruit and vegetables has reached 41 kg, 21 kg, 14 kg, 35 kg and 198 kg, respectively, which are all higher than the world's average. Statistics from the UN Food and Agriculture Organization show that China contributed 31 percent of the world's increased grain output in the 1980s. China's significant achievements in developing grain production have not only basically eradicated the problem of people not having enough to eat and wear and gradually raised the living standards of the Chinese people, but also made great contributions to the worldwide efforts to eliminate starvation and poverty.

　　纵观新中国建立以来粮食生产的发展，大致分为三个阶段：
The development of grain production since the founding of New China can be divided roughly into three phases:

　　第一阶段为１９５０—１９７８年。１９４９年，中国粮食总产量只有１．１３２亿吨，１９７８年达到３．０４８亿吨，２９年间年均递增３．５％。这一时期，中国通过改革土地所有制关系，引导农民走互助合作道路，解放了生产力，同时在改善农业基础设施、提高农业物质装备水平、加快农业科技进步等方面取得了显著成效，为粮食生产的持续发展奠定了基础。
The first phase (1950-1978): China's total grain output increased from 113.2 million tons in 1949 to 304.8 million tons in 1978, an average annual growth of 3.5 percent. During this 29-year period land ownership was first reformed and the peasants were led on to the road of mutual-aid and cooperation to liberate the productive forces, and remarkable success was achieved in improving agricultural infrastructure and the quantity and quality of farming equipment, and in promoting progress in agricultural science and technology. Therefore, a solid foundation was laid for the continued development of grain production.

　　第二阶段为１９７９—１９８４年。１９８４年，中国粮食总产量达到４．０７３亿吨，６年间年均递增４．９％，是新中国建立以来粮食增长最快的时期。这一时期粮食生产的快速增长，主要得益于中国政府在农村实施的一系列改革措施，特别是通过实行以家庭联产承包为主的责任制和统分结合的双层经营体制，以及较大幅度提高粮食收购价格等重大政策措施，极大地调动了广大农民的生产积极性，使过去在农业基础设施、科技、投入等方面积累的能量得以集中释放，扭转了中国粮食长期严重短缺的局面。
The second phase (1979-1984): In 1984 China's total grain output rose to 407.3 million tons, increasing by an average of 4.9 percent a year during the six years from 1979 to 1984. This second phase saw the highest increase rate in the country's grain production, which was made possible mainly by a series of reform policies and measures initiated in the rural areas by the Chinese government, including, among others, the household contract responsibility system with remuneration linked to output, the two-layer management system featuring the integration of centralization and decentralization, and raising, by a fairly large margin, of the prices of grain purchased by the state. These important policies and measures greatly stimulated the enthusiasm of the farmers, brought into full play the potential for agricultural production accumulated through years of efforts to improve agricultural infrastructure, the level of science and technology and the amount of investment. In this way an end was put to the situation of China's chronic grain shortages.

　　第三阶段为１９８５年至今。１９９５年，中国粮食总产量达到４．６６６亿吨，１１年间年均递增１．２％。这一时期，中国政府在继续发展粮食生产的同时，积极主动地进行农业生产结构调整，发展多种经营，食物多样化发展较快。猪牛羊肉、水产品、禽蛋、牛奶和水果产量分别达到４２５４万吨、２５１７万吨、１６７６万吨、５６２万吨和４２１１万吨，比１９８４年分别增长１．８倍、３．１倍、２．９倍、１．６倍和３．３倍。虽然这一时期粮食增长速度减缓，但由于非粮食食物增加，人民的生活质量明显提高。
The third phase (1985-present): In 1995 the country's grain output totaled 466.6 million tons, increasing by an average of 1.2 percent a year over the previous 11 years. While continuing to develop grain production in this period, the Chinese government has initiated measures to readjust the structure of agricultural production and develop a diversified agricultural economy. At the same time rapid progress was achieved in the production of various other kinds of foodstuffs, with the output of meat (pork, beef and mutton), aquatic products, eggs, milk and fruit reaching 42.54 million tons, 25.17 million tons, 16.76 million tons, 5.62 million tons and 42.11 million tons respectively, or 2.8, 4.1, 3.9, 2.6 and 4.3 times the 1984 figures, respectively. Despite a lowered increase rate of grain production, the quality of people's life was greatly improved because of increased non-grain food supply during this period.

　　新中国之所以成功地解决了人民的吃饭问题，主要经验是：始终坚持以农业为基础，把农业放在发展国民经济的首位，把发展粮食生产作为农村经济工作的重点，千方百计争取粮食总量稳定增长；改革农村生产关系，实行以家庭联产承包为主的责任制和统分结合的双层经营体制，扩大粮食的市场调节范围，合理调整粮食价格，调动农民发展粮食生产的积极性；不断改善农业生产基础条件，加快农业科技进步，提高农业装备水平，增加农业投入，保护生态环境；在决不放松粮食生产的前提下，综合开发利用国土资源，积极发展多种经营，增加农民收入。
The successful experiences of the People's Republic of China in solving the problem of feeding the whole population can be summarized as follows: It has always stuck to the principle that agriculture is the basis of the national economy, giving top priority to agriculture in national economic development. It has made the increase of grain production the key point in rural economic work, making all possible efforts to ensure a steady increase in total grain output. It has carried out the reform of rural relations of production, including implementation of the policy of the household contract responsibility system with remuneration linked to output and the two-layer management system featuring the integration of centralization and decentralization. In addition, the scope of market readjustment for grain has been expanded and the price of grain adjusted rationally so as to mobilize the enthusiasm of the farmers for grain production. The basic conditions for agricultural production have been continuously improved by expediting scientific and technological advances in agriculture, improving the quality and quantity of farming equipment, increasing agricultural input and protecting the ecological environment. Given the precondition that grain production is never to be compromised, land resources have been developed and made full use of in a comprehensive way while a diversified economy has been vigorously developed to raise farmers' income.

　　现在，中国城乡居民的温饱问题已经基本解决，中国政府今后的任务是在进一步增加粮食总量的同时，努力发展食物多样化生产，调整食物结构，继续提高人民的生活质量，向小康和比较富裕的目标迈进。当然，中国政府也清醒地看到，目前中国粮食供需平衡的水平还有待进一步提高，供需偏紧的状况还将长期存在。由于一些地区自然环境恶劣，耕地和水资源短缺，到１９９５年底，全国还有６５００万人没有解决温饱问题（约占总人口的５％）。中国政府正在实施的“扶贫攻坚计划”，就是要力争到本世纪末基本解决这部分人的温饱问题。
At present, the great majority of both urban and rural residents in China have adequate food and clothing. The tasks ahead for the Chinese government are, while ensuring a continued increase in grain output, to vigorously promote diversified food production, readjust the food structure, and continue to raise the people's quality of life from the stage of simply having enough food and clothing to leading a relatively well-off and comfortable life. However, the Chinese government is aware that the level of balance between the supply of and demand for grain in the country will have to be further enhanced, and the tense situation between supply and demand will continue to exist for a long time to come. Meanwhile, because of adverse natural conditions and shortage of cultivated land and water resources in some places, there were, by the end of 1995, 65 million people (about five percent of the whole population) who still did not have adequate food and clothing. To tackle this problem the Chinese government has initiated the ``poverty-alleviating program'' to lift those people above the poverty level by the end of this century.

未来中国的粮食消费需求

       Prospects for China's Consumption Demand for Grain

      未来中国城乡居民食物消费要走与国民经济增长相适应、与农业资源状况相适应的路子，建立科学、适度的消费模式。中国政府将通过引导消费，既挖掘粮食生产潜力，又挖掘非粮食食物生产潜力，避免粮食需求超过供给能力过快增长。

      In the years to come a scientific and moderate food consumption pattern which keeps pace with the national economic growth and conforms to the situation of the nation's agricultural resources should be brought into being among both the urban and rural residents. The Chinese government will strive to avoid a rapid increase in grain demand beyond the supply capacity through guided grain consumption and tapping the grain-producing potential as well as the potential of non-grain food production.

      1984年以来，中国人均占有粮食相对稳定，但由于动物性食品增加较多，人民的营养水平明显改善，平均每人每天供给的热量达到2727大卡，蛋白质和脂肪分别达到70克和52克，高于同等人均国民生产总值的国家，基本达到世界平均水平。

      Since 1984, though the per capita share of grain has been relatively stable, the nutritional status of the Chinese people has markedly improved because of the increased supply of food of animal origin. Food supply per person per day in terms of calories reaches 2,727 kilocalories, including those from 70 grams of protein and 52 grams of fat. This figure is higher than the figures for those other countries with per capita GNP comparable to China's. Therefore, it can be said that the food supply in China has basically reached the average world level.

      按照《九十年代中国食物结构改革与发展纲要》和城乡居民的饮食习惯，今后中国人民的食物构成将是中热量、高蛋白、低脂肪的模式，在保留传统膳食结构的基础上，适当增加动物性食品数量，提高食物质量。由于食物构成的变化，直接食用的口粮将继续减少，饲料粮将逐渐增加。这样，通过坚持不懈地发展粮食生产，到2030年中国人口出现高峰值时，人均占有粮食400公斤左右，其中口粮200多公斤，其余转化为动物性食品，就可以满足人民生活水平提高和营养改善的要求。

      In accordance with the "China Dietary Pattern Reform and Development Program in the 1990s'' and the dietary habits of the Chinese people, a food consumption pattern featuring medium calories, high protein and low fat will be gradually brought into being among both urban and rural residents. On the basis of retaining the traditional food structure, food of animal origin will be added to a proper extent to improve the food quality. This gradual change in the food consumption pattern will cause the staple food consumption to decrease while the supply of grain used for feed will gradually increase. Based on this assumption and by making unswerving efforts in grain production, China's per capita share of grain is estimated to reach approximately 400 kg by 2030, despite the fact that the population will reach a new peak. Over half of the 400 kg will be used for staple foodstuffs, while the rest will be used for producing food of animal origin so as to satisfy the need to improve the living standard and the nutritional level of the people.

      中国政府相信，实现上述消费模式是有可能的。这是因为：第一，虽然中国人均占有粮食不可能增加很多，但发展食物多样化生产的前景广阔,随着肉类、禽蛋、水产品、水果、蔬菜等供给量的继续增加，对口粮消费的替代作用将进一步增大。第二，通过推进养殖业科技进步，提高饲料报酬率，提高食草型畜禽和水产品等节粮产品的比重，可以减缓对商品饲料粮的过快需求。第三，中国目前处在一个食物消费低增长时期。从世界上许多国家的经验看，食物消费达到一定水平后将趋于稳定。中国作为低收入国家，达到目前城市的食物消费水平已具有超前性，这是由于家庭投资渠道单一，购买力相对集中在食物消费领域所致。今后随着医疗、住房等社会保障制度的改革，人民增加的收入将较多地用在住和行等方面，食物支出占消费支出的比重将逐步下降，食物消费的增长将会低于收入的增长。

      The Chinese government believes that the above-mentioned food consumption pattern is likely to be realized. First, China has great potential for developing diversified food production, though the per capita grain share will not be increased by a big margin. Non-staple food will play an increasingly greater role in substituting for staple food as the supply of meat, eggs, aquatic products, fruit and vegetables increases. Second, the rapidly increasing demand for commercial grain used for feed can be slowed down through promoting scientific and technological advances in aquatic farming, enhancing the feed efficiency and increasing the proportion of grain-saving products like herbivorous livestock and poultry and aquatic products. Third, China today is at a period of low increase in food consumption. The experiences of many other countries prove that food consumption tends to be constant after having reached a certain level. The present-day urban food consumption level in China as a low-income country has gone beyond the practical limit. This was caused by lack of domestic investment channels and the fact that people spend a greater proportion of their incomes on food. In the future the proportion of their increased incomes spent on housing and transportation will increase along with the implementation of medical, housing and other social security reforms. At the same time, the proportion of food expenses in the total consumption expenses of the people will decrease gradually and the increase of food consumption will be behind the income increase.

      根据上述消费模式的发展趋势以及人口增长规模，未来几十年中国粮食需求量为：2000年人口接近13亿，按人均占有385公斤计算，总需求量达到5亿吨；2010年人口接近14亿，按人均占有390公斤计算，总需求量达到5.5亿吨；2030年人口达到16亿峰值，按人均占有400公斤计算，总需求量达到6.4亿吨左右。

      In the light of the above trend of change in consumption pattern and the estimated population growth, China's demand for grain in the next few decades is projected as follows: By 2000 the population will reach 1.3 billion and the total demand for grain will be 500 million tons, based on 385 kg per person; by 2010 the population will approach 1.4 billion and the total demand for grain will be 550 million tons, based on 390 kg per person; and by 2030 the population will peak at 1.6 billion and the total demand for grain will be approximately 640 million tons, based on 400 kg per person. 

中国能够依靠自己的力量实现粮食基本自给

　　 China Can Basically Achieve Self-Sufficiency in Grain Through Self-Reliance

      立足国内资源，实现粮食基本自给，是中国解决粮食供需问题的基本方针。中国将努力促进国内粮食增产，在正常情况下，粮食自给率不低于95%，净进口量不超过国内消费量的5%。

      The basic principle for solving the problem of grain supply and demand in China is to rely on the domestic resources and basically achieve self-sufficiency in grain. China endeavors to increase its grain production so that its self-sufficiency rate of grain under normal conditions will be above 95 percent and the net import rate five percent, or even less, of the total consumption quantity.

      现阶段中国已经实现了粮食基本自给,在未来的发展过程中，中国依靠自己的力量实现粮食基本自给，客观上具备诸多有利因素。根据中国农业自然资源、生产条件、技术水平和其他发展条件，粮食增产潜力很大。

      China has basically achieved self-sufficiency in grain at the present stage, and there are many favorable objective factors for her to maintain such achievement by her own efforts in the course of future development: Natural agricultural resources, production conditions, technical level and some other conditions ensure great potential in this respect.

      提高现有耕地单位面积产量有潜力。目前，中国同一类型地区粮食单产水平悬殊，高的每公顷7500—15000公斤，低的只有3000—5000公斤。在播种面积相对稳定的前提下，只要1996—2010年粮食单产年均递增1%，2011—2030年年均递增0.7%，就可以达到预期的粮食总产量目标。这样的速度与过去46年年均递增3.1%相比，是比较低的。即使考虑到土地报酬率递减的因素，也是有条件实现的。目前。中国的粮食单产水平与世界粮食高产国家相比也是比较低的。中国要在短时间内达到粮食高产国家的水平难度较大。但经过努力是完全可以缩小差距的。通过改造中低产田、兴修水利、扩大灌溉面积、推广先进适用技术等工程和生物措施，可使每公顷产量提高1500公斤以上。

      There is potential for increasing the yield per unit area on the existing cultivated land. At present, the per unit area yield of grain varies widely in the same districts, the highest yield being 7,500 kg to 15,000 kg per hectare, and the lowest 3,000 kg to 5,000 kg. Given a relatively stable sown area, China can achieve its desired total grain output target if the annual average increase rate of per unit area yield is one percent from 1996 to 2010 and 0.7 percent from 2011 to 2030. Compared to the annual average increase rate of 3.1 percent of the per unit area yield in the past 46 years, it is clear that one percent and 0.7 percent are fairly low. So to achieve the target is totally possible even if the factor of diminishing land returns rate is considered. At present, China's per unit area yield of grain is low compared with the countries with high grain yields. It will be difficult for China to reach the level of countries with high grain production in a short period of time, but the gap can certainly be narrowed through earnest efforts. The grain output per hectare can be increased by more than 1,500 kg through the upgrading of medium- and low-yield land, beefing up water-control projects, enlarging irrigated areas and spreading the use of advanced agrotechnology.

      开发后备耕地资源有潜力。中国现有宜农荒地3500万公顷，其中可开垦为耕地的约有1470万公顷。中国政府将在加强对现有耕地保护的同时，加快宜农荒地的开发和工矿废弃地的复垦，未来几十年计划每年开发复垦30万公顷以上，以弥补同期耕地占用，保持耕地面积长期稳定。通过提高复种指数，使粮食作物播种面积稳定在1.1亿公顷左右。

      There is also potential for exploiting untouched arable land resources. China now has 35 million ha of wasteland which is suitable for farming. Of this, about 14.7 million ha can be reclaimed. The Chinese government will make efforts to speed up the reclamation of wasteland suitable for farming as well as land discarded by factories and mines, while measures will be adopted to protect the existing cultivated land. In the next few decades China plans to reclaim more than 300,000 ha each year to make up for the loss of cultivated land appropriated for non-farming uses and to keep the area of cultivated land constant for a long period of time. The grain-sown area will be stabilized at about 110 million ha through the increase of the multiple crop index.

      依靠科技进步有潜力。目前，农业科技在中国农业增产中的贡献率约为35%，世界上农业发达国家在60%以上。中国政府已确定并正在努力实施科教兴农战略，力争逐步缩小中国与世界发达国家在农业科技领域的差距，到2000年使科技进步对农业的贡献率提高到50%，到2030年接近世界发达国家水平。这是中国粮食生产再上新台阶的巨大动力。

      There is scope for scientific and technological improvement. At present, the contribution made by science and technology to agriculture accounts for about 35 percent of the agricultural production increase, while it exceeds 60 percent in the agriculturally advanced countries. The Chinese government has drawn up a strategy for agricultural development by relying on science, technology and education and is striving to put it into practice so as to narrow this gap: By 2000 the contribution rate of science and technology to agriculture will be increased to 50 percent, and by 2030 it will be close to that of the advanced countries. This will enable China to go a step further in grain production.

      利用非粮食食物资源有潜力。中国水域、草原、山地资源丰富，开发潜力巨大。据统计，全国1747万公顷内陆水域中，可供养殖的水面675万公顷，目前利用率仅为69%；可供养鱼的稻田670万公顷，利用率仅为15%；海水可养殖面积260万公顷，利用率仅为28%。中国将努力提高现有水域的生产能力，保持水产品继续快速增长。中国现有草地面积3.9亿公顷，其中可利用面积3.2亿公顷，居世界第三位，若将其中的大部分建设成人工草场，提高草原畜牧业集约化水平，就能增加大量的畜产品。中国山区面积占国土总面积的70%，具有发展木本食物的良好条件，增加木本食物的前景也十分广阔。

      Non-grain food resources can be exploited also. China has rich water, grassland and sloping land resources which have great potential for exploitation. According to statistics, among the 17.47 million ha of inland waters, 6.75 million ha can be used for aquaculture. At present, only 69 percent of the water area is used. About 6.70 million ha of rice fields can be used for fish breeding, but the utilization rate at present is only 15 percent. And China has an offshore water area of 2.60 million ha suitable for aquaculture, but the utilization rate is only 28 percent. China will actively increase the productivity of its waters so as to keep a continuous rapid increase of aquatic products. China has a grassland area of 390 million ha, of which about 320 million ha can be used, which places China third in the world in the area of usable grassland. If the intensification level of livestock farming in grasslands is improved through the development of artificial grassland, animal by-products will increase greatly. Moreover, mountainous areas account for 70 percent of China's total territory, and this favorable condition for the development of arbor foodstuffs will offer China wide prospects for increasing the supply of such stuffs.

      节约粮食有潜力。据专家测算，中国粮食在种、收、运、储、销和加工、消费等环节的损失率至少为10%，总损失量在4500万吨以上。如果将各环节的损失降至合理范围，每年至少可节约粮食2000万吨。

      Grain losses can be curtailed. According to estimates by experts, the loss rate of grain is at least 10 percent in the course of planting, harvesting, transportation, storage, selling, processing and consumption -- a total of well over 45 million tons. So it will be possible to save at least 20 million tons of grain every year if such losses are reduced to within the rational limits.

      中国政府通过增加国内粮食生产，保持粮食供需平衡的决心是坚定的，有信心领导全国人民实现这一目标。同时，中国政府也清醒地认识到实现这个目标的艰巨性：第一，中国农业资源人均占有量在世界上属于低水平，耕地和水资源不足是农业发展的最大制约因素。在这样的资源条件下，要创造出远高于世界平均水平的农业生产力，必须花大力气。第二，中国农业基础设施薄弱，生产手段落后，抗灾能力差，需要坚持不懈地改善生产条件，提高抗灾能力。第三，中国农户生产规模小，经营分散，在向社会主义市场经济体制转变的过程中，容易造成粮食生产的波动，需要进一步加强对粮食生产的调控。第四，中国正处在工业化迅速发展的阶段，在资源分配上还存在不利于粮食生产的倾向，需要继续对农业特别是粮食生产采取有效的支持措施。总之，中国政府将正视困难，在经济布局和工作指导上，继续严格执行保护耕地和生态环境的基本国策，实施科教兴农和可持续发展两大战略，推动农业经济体制和农业增长方式的根本性转变，以促进粮食综合生产能力的稳步提高。

      The Chinese government has determined to even up the grain supply to meet the demand through increasing grain production, and is confident of its ability to lead the people throughout the country to achieve this goal. But at the same time it also knows clearly that this is not an easy task. First, the average amount of agricultural resources per capita in China is low compared with many other countries. China lacks cultivated land and water resources, and this is the dominant factor restricting its agricultural development. In these conditions China must make great efforts to advance its agricultural productivity and make it far higher than the average world level. Second, China's agricultural infrastructure is weak, means of production lag behind and it does not have sufficient ability to fight natural calamities. So a sustained effort should be made in these respects. Third, grain production will fluctuate in the course of the transformation of the economy into a socialist market one because of the small-scale production and decentralized management of peasant households. So adjustment and control of grain production should be strengthened. Fourth, because China is in a period of rapid industrial development there is a distribution tendency in resources that is unfavorable to grain production. So effective measures have to be adopted in support of agriculture, especially grain production. In a word, facing difficulties squarely, the Chinese government will continue to strictly carry out the basic policy of protecting cultivated land and ecological environment in its economic distribution and its work guidance and implement the two major strategies: developing agriculture by relying on science, technology and education in the countryside, and realizing sustainable development. Thus it expects to promote a fundamental change in the agricultural economic system and the method of increasing agricultural production, so as to facilitate the steady increase of the overall grain production capability.

      中国立足国内解决粮食供需平衡问题，并不排除利用国际资源作为必要补充，但这只起品种、丰歉调剂和区域平衡的作用。这是因为：第一，粮食是安定天下的产业。对一个拥有12亿多人口的大国来说，必须保持较高的粮食自给率，这是保持安定的必要条件，否则，就难以保证国民经济持续、快速、健康发展。第二，粮食安全。中国每年粮食消费量占世界粮食消费总量的五分之一，如果进口过多，不仅国际市场难以承受，也会给低收入国家购粮带来不利影响。第三，农村劳动力就业。目前中国有4亿多农村劳动力，发展粮食生产是解决农村就业、增加农民收入的主要渠道之一。过多进口粮食，必然打击国内粮食生产,影响农民就业。中国立足国内解决粮食问题，只会有利于改善世界粮食安全状况，增强世界粮食贸易中的稳定因素。

      While standing for the resolution of balance between the supply of and demand for grain at home, China will not refuse to use international resources as a necessary complement. This will, however, only play the role of regulation in varieties, in case of crop failures and to support poor regions. There are the following three reasons for China to even up its grain supply to meet the demand: First, grain production plays an important role in maintaining social stability. China is a country with a population of more than 1.2 billion, which makes it imperative for the government to ensure a high rate of grain self-sufficiency as a necessary condition for stability. Otherwise, it will not be able to maintain its national economy's sustained, rapid and healthy development. Second, stability of the grain market. The quantity of grain consumed in China every year is one fifth of the world's total. If China were to import a great deal of grain from other countries, the international grain market would be under severe pressure, and poorer countries would be unable to obtain enough supplies of cheap grain from it. Third, the employment of the rural work force. At present, China has more than 400 million laborers in the countryside, and the development of grain production is one of the main ways of stimulating the employment of the rural work force and increasing the income of the farmers. To import too much grain would have an unfavorable impact on grain production at home as well as on the employment of the rural work force. China's striving for relying mainly on her own efforts to solve the grain problem will serve only to improve the stability of the world grain market and strengthen the stabilizing factor of the international grain trade.

      从历史上看，中国对国际粮食市场的依赖度不大。从新中国建立至六十年代之前，中国是粮食净出口国。六十年代以后,粮食有进有出，进大于出。七十年代末实行改革开放以来，中国净进口粮食占国内粮食生产的比重呈减少趋势，1978—1984年为3.2%，1985—1990年为1.2%，1991—1995年为0.4%。因此，中国进口少量粮食，绝不会对世界粮食安全构成威胁，国际上所谓的“中国粮食威胁论”是毫无根据的。中国在进口一些粮食的同时，还出口一些具有较高附加值的食品。1985—1995年，中国食品及主要供食用的畜禽等出口额为756亿美元，进口额为340亿美元，是食品净出口国。中国愿意与粮食出口国在平等互利的基础上，建立比较稳定的粮食贸易关系。

      China has never relied on the international grain market too much. From the founding of New China to the eve of the 1960s China was a net exporter of grain. After that it began to import more than it exported. Since the reform and opening polices were introduced at the end of the 1970s the net import percentage in domestic grain production has been on the decrease. It was 3.2 percent from 1978 to 1984, 1.2 percent from 1985 to 1990 and 0.4 percent from 1991 to 1995. Therefore, the small quantity of grain imported by China will not imperil the stability of the international grain market. There is no basis to the international clamor about a "China threat in food supply''. It is true that China imports some grain, but at the same time it also exports some foodstuffs with fairly high added value. From 1985 to 1995 the export value of foodstuffs and edible animals and poultry was US$ 75.6 billion, while the import value was US$ 34 billion, so China was a net food-exporting country. China is willing to establish comparatively stable trade relations in grain with the grain-exporting countries on the basis of equality and mutual benefit. 

　　努力改善生产条件，千方百计提高粮食综合生产能力

　　 Striving to Improve Production Conditionsto Increase the Comprehensive Grain Production Ability

　　为实现粮食增产目标，中国政府将在保护耕地资源，增加农业投入，加强水利建设，提高农业物质装备水平等方面，采取一系列措施，全面提高粮食综合生产能力。

　　  A series of measures will be adopted in protecting cultivated land resources, increasing agricultural input, and improving water conservancy facilities and the standard of agricultural equipment so as to increase China's comprehensive grain production ability. Only in this way can it fulfill the task of increasing grain output.

　　保护耕地始终是增产粮食的基础。多年来，中国制定和完善了《农业法》、《土地管理法》、《水土保持法》等一系列法律法规，抑制了耕地面积锐减势头，使耕地净减少面积由九十年代前的年均30多万公顷，下降到目前的不足20万公顷。随着今后工业化进程的加快，经济建设对耕地的需求压力仍然很大，中国政府将按照节约用地、少占或不占耕地的原则，采取更加有力的措施确保耕地总量的动态平衡：控制非农业占用耕地，进一步健全耕地保护制度，切实加强基本农田保护；严格执行建设用地审批制度，控制城市发展规模，盘活存量土地，提高土地使用效率；加强乡村建设和乡镇企业发展的规划管理，引导乡镇企业集中连片，发展工业小区，调整村镇居民点用地，改造村镇，退宅还田；实行非农建设占用耕地同开发、复垦挂钩。

　　  Protecting cultivated land is always the foundation for increased grain production. Over the years, certain laws and regulations have been worked out and perfected, including the Agriculture Law, Land Management Law and Water and Soil Conservation Law. The result has been an alleviation in the trend of rapid reduction of cultivated land, the net area of cultivated land reduction having dropped to less than 200,000 ha from the annual average of 300,000 ha before the 1990s. Following the speeding up of industrialization in the future there will be a growing demand for land for economic construction. In view of this the government will, in light of the principle of “economization on land use and little or no occupation of cultivated land” adopt still more effective measures to ensure the dynamic equilibrium of the total cultivated land, restrict occupation of cultivated land for non-agricultural purposes, improve the land preservation system and strengthen the protection of basic farmland. The examination and approval system for the use of land for construction must be implemented strictly and the development scale of cities controlled so as to efficiently use the available land and increase the land utilization rate. Administration of the plans for village and township construction and township enterprise development will be strengthened. Scattered township enterprises will be joined together to form industrial districts and residential areas concentrated to save as much land as possible for farming. A policy of linking the appropriation of land for non-agricultural construction purposes to land development and reclamation will be implemented.

　　新中国建立以来，中国政府领导人民治理江河、拦洪蓄水、改善生产条件，修建水库8.4万座，改造易涝地2000万公顷，灌溉面积由解放初期的1600万公顷增加到目前的4933万公顷，供水能力达到5000亿立方米，有效地提高了农业抗灾能力。今后，中国政府将继续在这方面作出不懈努力：建设一批大中型水利工程，缓解水资源区域、季节分布不均问题；广泛开展农田水利基本建设，到2000年使有效灌溉面积达到5330万公顷，2010年达到5670万公顷左右，2030年达到6670万公顷以上，分别占耕地面积的56%、60%和70%；加快解决骨干排灌水利工程老化失修问题，使旱涝保收的农田面积由目前的3300万公顷增加到2030年的4000万公顷以上，使其中的2000万公顷以上农田单位面积产量达到每公顷15吨；大力发展节水灌溉和旱作农业，到2030年，使节水灌溉面积由目前的1300万公顷提高到4000万公顷以上，灌溉水有效利用率由40%提高到60%以上，自然降水的有效利用率提高到30%以上。同时，加快中低产田改造。到2000年，中国计划改造中低产田1400万公顷，力争到2030年使现有6000万公顷中低产田全部得到改造。

　　  Since the founding of New China, led by the Chinese government the Chinese people have built 84,000 reservoirs as well as many other flood control and water storage projects to improve production conditions. They have also improved 20 million ha of areas liable to waterlogging. The irrigated area has increased to the present 49.33 million ha from 16 million ha in the early Liberation period, and the water supply capability has reached 500 billion cubic meters, greatly strengthening the ability of agriculture to withstand natural calamities. The Chinese government will continue to work hard to build a group of large and medium-sized water control projects to solve the problem of unbalanced distribution of water resources in different regions and seasons. Agricultural capital construction will be undertaken on an extensive scale, so that the effective area of irrigated land will reach 53.30 million ha by 2000, 56.70 million ha by 2010 and 66.70 million ha by 2030, respectively accounting for 56 percent, 60 percent and 70 percent of the cultivated land. The rebuilding and repair of key irrigation and drainage projects should be quickened to increase the area with stable yields despite drought or excessive rain to more than 40 million ha in 2030 from the present 33 million ha. The per unit area yield of more than 20 million ha of the 2030 figure will reach 15 tons per ha. The use of water-saving irrigation methods and dry land farming are encouraged. Also by 2030, the area irrigated by water-saving irrigation methods will be increased to more than 40 million ha from the present 13 million ha and the effective utilization rate of irrigation water will be increased to more than 60 percent from 40 percent. In addition, the effective utilization rate of natural precipitation will be raised to upwards of 30 percent. At the same time, the improvement of medium- and low-yield fields should be speeded up. China plans to upgrade 14 million ha of medium- and low-yield fields by 2000, with a target upgrading of 60 million ha of medium- and low-yield fields by 2030.

　　新中国建立后，农用工业发展很快，对保证粮食生产发展起到了重要作用。化肥生产总量由建国初期的3.9万吨(按100%有效成分计算，下同)增加到目前的2450万吨，使用量由7.9万吨增加到3570万吨，每公顷耕地的使用量375公斤；农业机械总动力由12.1亿瓦特增加到3607亿瓦特，大中型拖拉机由1300台增加到67万台，农用载重汽车由4000多辆增加到80万辆，农村用电量由0.5亿千瓦小时增加到1628亿千瓦小时。但是，从总体看，目前农用工业仍难以满足农业持续发展的要求。今后，中国将大力发展国内化肥生产，提高化肥自给率，到2000年做到氮肥基本自给。同时，积极推进农药、农膜、农机、农电、柴油等农用工业的发展。

　　  Since the founding of New China, agroindustry has developed by leaps and bounds, playing an important role in ensuring increased grain production. The total output of chemical fertilizer has increased to the present 24.5 million tons from 39,000 tons in the early Liberation period (expressed in 100 percent available ingredients -- similarly hereinafter), and the amount used has increased to 35.70 million tons from 79,000 tons, averaging 375 kg per hectare of cultivated land. Agricultural machinery power has increased to 360.7 billion watts from 1.21 billion watts in the same period, the number of large and medium-sized tractors has increased to 670,000 from 1,300 and that of agricultural trucks to 800,000 from 4,000. Nowadays in the rural areas 162.8 billion kwh of electricity are used per year, while in the early Liberation period the figure was only 50 million kwh. As a whole, however, the agroindustry today is still unable to meet the needs of sustained agricultural development. For this reason, China will continue to make great efforts to expand its chemical fertilizer production and raise the self-sufficiency rate of chemical fertilizer. By 2000 China will be basically self-sufficient in nitrogenous fertilizer. At the same time, the production of farm chemicals, plastic lm, agricultural machinery and electrical power and diesel oil will be developed rapidly.

　　中国将逐步调整国民收入和社会资金分配结构，在计划安排和资金投放上首先保证农业尤其是粮食生产发展需要，提高固定资产投资、财政预算内资金、银行信贷资金用于农业的比重，以增加农业投入总量。到2000年，中央政府基本建设计划安排的预算内农业投资比重由目前的17%提高到20%以上，地方政府比照中央的做法相应增加预算内农业基本建设投资；各级财政每年对农业投入的增长幅度要高于财政经常性收入的增长幅度；保持农业贷款增长率高于各项贷款平均增长率，银行新增贷款规模中农业贷款的比重达到10%以上，提高信用社贷款用于农业的比重；进一步完善农村金融体制，建立包括农村政策性银行、商业性银行和农村合作金融组织在内的农村金融体系，保证农村政策性金融资金重点用于粮食生产。中国政府将继续采取一些旨在提高农业投入产出效益的政策措施，调动农村集体经济组织和农户增加粮食生产投入的积极性。中国将按照“谁投资，谁受益”的原则，对大型工商企业进行农业综合开发给予贷款支持，积极扩大农业利用外资的规模，采取优惠政策，鼓励外商投资农业领域特别是粮食生产。

　　  The structure of national income and capital distribution of society will be gradually adjusted. Priority should be given to agriculture, especially grain production, in terms of planning and capital input, and a higher percentage of the fixed assets investment, state budgeted funds and bank loans will go to agriculture so as to increase the total agricultural input. By 2000 agricultural investment in the budget for the capital construction plan of the central government will increase to more than 20 percent from the present 17 percent. In light of the practice of the central government, local governments will also increase their investment in agriculture. The annual agricultural input of financial departments at all levels should increase by a wider margin than regular financial revenues. The increase rate of agricultural loans should be higher than that of other loans. The proportion of agricultural loans should exceed 10 percent of the total bank loans and credit cooperatives should increase the proportion of their agricultural loans. The rural financial system should be further improved, including the establishment of a rural policy bank, commercial bank and cooperative financial organization. The rural policy funds should be guaranteed to be mainly used for grain production. The Chinese government will continue to adopt a series of policies and measures for increasing the efficiency of agricultural input so as to promote enthusiasm for increasing input in grain production on the part of rural collective economy organizations and households. With the promise of due benefits to investors, the government should extend loans to large industrial and commercial enterprises which engage in agricultural development. The scale of using foreign investment for agriculture should be expanded, and preferential treatment provided for such investment, especially in grain production.

推进科教兴农，转变粮食增长方式

 Developing Agriculture by Relying on Science, Technology and Education and Changing the Grain Increase Method

    转变粮食增长方式，要从改革、优化产业结构和耕作制度，加强科学管理，提高粮食生产集约化程度和农业资源有效利用率等多方面入手，但最主要的是依靠科技进步，加快科教兴粮步伐，走高产、优质、高效、低耗的路子。新中国建立后，共取得较大的农业科技成果3万多项，其中获得国家或部级奖励的6000多项，有一些成果处于国际领先水平。主要粮食作物品种更新了3—5次，每次增产幅度均达到10%以上，仅杂交水稻一项，近10年就累计推广1.6亿公顷，增产稻谷2.4亿吨；多种综合栽培技术大面积推广应用，对粮食增产发挥了重要作用；在生物工程等高技术领域，两系法杂交稻新组合等一批重大技术已显示出良好的发展前景。但是，与世界发达国家相比，中国农业科技水平还有较大差距。中国政府已确定并正在实施科教兴农战略，将采取各种措施，努力提高粮食增产中的科技含量。

    To change the grain increase method we must first carry out reform, optimize the industrial structure and farming system, stress scientific management, enhance the level of intensive farming in grain production and raise the utilization rate of agricultural resources. The most important thing is to rely on progress in science and technology, step up efforts to develop grain production by relying on science, technology and education and concentrate on high yields, high quality, high efficiency and low consumption. Since the birth of the People's Republic, China has made over 30,000 major agricultural scientific and technological achievements, of which over 6,000 have won awards from the state or ministries, and some of them have reached the international advanced level. The va"iriety of the most important grain crops has been renewed three to five times, each time resulting in increased yields of 10 percent or more. In the past decade the total area sown to hybrid rice has reached 160 million ha, with an increased output of 240 million tons; the large-scale popularization of various comprehensive cultivation technologies has played an important role in grain production increase; and in the hi-tech sphere, including bioengineering, a number of important technologies, such as the new combination of two-line hybrid rice, have shown favorable development prospects. But, as compared with countries with advanced agriculture, China's agricultural science and technology lags fairly far behind. Hence, the Chinese government has chosen and put into practice the strategy of developing agriculture by relying on science, technology and education. It will adopt a series of measures to enable science and technology to play a greater role in increased grain production.

    加快实施“种子工程”。完善优良品种的繁育、引进、加工、销售、推广体系，到2000年，主要粮食作物用种全面更换一次，50%的商品种子采取包衣处理，提高水稻、玉米、小麦三大粮食作物统一供种率和良种覆盖率。发挥中国粮食种质资源丰富、育种基础较好的优势，加强水稻、小麦和玉米等新品种的培育，促进农作物品种的更新换代。

    Speeding up the implementation of the ``Seed Project.'' China will perfect the breeding, import, processing, marketing and extension system of improved varieties. By 2000 seeds of all main grain crops will be renewed; 50 percent of commodity seeds will be coated; and the unified seed supply rate and the coverage rate of improved varieties of rice, corn and wheat will be raised. China's advantages of rich germplasm resources and a good seed-breeding basis will be brought into full play. In addition, China will strengthen the cultivation of new varieties of rice, wheat and corn, and speed up the replacement of the older generations of varieties by new ones.

    加快现有科技成果转化和粮食生产重大技术的科研攻关与引进。今后几年，将重点推广优良新品种、水稻旱育稀植及抛秧、地膜覆盖、精量半精量机械化播种、病虫害综合防治、科学用肥、节水灌溉和旱作农业等重大适用技术。继续挖掘精耕细作、增施有机肥、用地养地结合等传统农业技术的增产潜力，形成传统农业与现代农业相结合的技术应用体系。逐步健全县、乡、村三级农业技术推广网络，扶持各类民办专业技术组织的发展，形成国家、集体和各种民办技术组织相互配合、相互补充的农业技术推广服务体系。围绕对中国粮食生产发展有重大影响的科研项目，组织联合攻关，积极引进一批具有显著增产效果的重大粮食生产技术。

    Quickening the transfer of existing scientific and technological achievements into productivity, and the scientific research and importation of key technologies concerning grain production. In the next few years China will concentrate on spreading the following important agricultural techniques: improved new varieties, paddy rice nurture in dry nursery and thin planting by throwing rice seedlings, plastic mulching, precise and semi-precise mechanical seeding, the integrated pest management, scientific fertilization, water-saving irrigation, and dry land farming. Efforts will be continued to be made to tap the potential of traditional agricultural technologies for increasing output, such as intensive cultivation, increased amounts of organic fertilizers, and the combination of utilizing land with maintaining it, to form a technical application system integrating traditional and modern agriculture. In addition, the country will perfect the three-level (county, township and village) agrotechnique popularization network step by step, support the development of various non-governmental special technical organizations and form a service system for popularizing agricultural technologies in which the state, collectives and various non-governmental technical organizations will work in coordination and complement each other. Scientific research projects with special influence on grain production will be given extra support and the import of a number of important grain production technologies will be speeded up.

    加强对农民的职业技术培训。利用现有500多所农林中专学校、2000多所县级农业广播电视学校和基层农业技术推广机构，广泛开展农民职业技术培训，提高农民接受和应用农业新技术的能力。实施“绿色证书”工程，到2000年使1000万农民获得“绿色证书”，培养一大批粮食种植能手。

    Reinforcing vocational training among the farmers. China will make full use of its existing 500-odd agricultural and forestry polytechnical schools, more than 2,000 county-level agricultural broadcasting and TV schools and grass-roots agrotechnology popularization organs to improve farmers' abilities to accept and apply new agrotechnologies through extensive vocational training, especially through the ``Green Certificate'' project. By 2000, ten million farmers will have obtained such certificates and large numbers of grain-growing experts will have emerged.

    深化农业科技教育体制改革。优化农业科研结构，建立起学科先进、科研与生产紧密结合的科研新体制。国家和地方政府择优支持一批重点农业科研、教学单位，保持一支精干的研究队伍，从事基础研究、重大实用技术研究和高新技术研究。积极鼓励一部分科研教学人员，深入农村第一线，推广技术，培训农民。加强政府对农业科技和教育事业的统筹规划，推动农业科研、教育、推广相结合，共同为发展粮食生产服务。

    Deepening reform of the system for agricultural science-technology and education. China will improve its agricultural scientific research structure and set up a new scientific research system featuring advanced disciplines and the close integration of scientific research with production. The state and local governments will selectively support leading agricultural scientific research and education institutions to foster a capable contingent of scientists for important basic practical technology and new- and hi-tech research. Some people engaged in scientific research and education will be encouraged in an active way to go deep into the countryside to spread technology and train farmers. The government's unified plan for agricultural science and technology and relevant education should be strengthened to speed up the integration of agricultural scientific research and education, and popularization of agrotechnologies to improve grain production.

    努力提高资源利用率，减少粮食损失。在有条件的地方，逐步实行适度规模经营，提高粮食生产集约化水平。积极推广降低粮食生产成本的技术，减少物资消耗，提高粮食生产效益。加强对粮食播种、收获、储运、加工等各个环节的管理，推广运用节能机械，节约粮食：在生产环节，通过对种子精选、加工和包衣处理，提高种子质量，减少用种量；在收获环节，推广机械化收割；在仓储环节，推广应用先进保粮技术，运用新的包装技术和包装材料；在运输环节，改造传统的运输方式，提高铁路、公路和水运的现代化水平；在加工环节，应用新工艺、新设备，提高粮食加工机械的技术性能。

    Efforts will also be made to raise the utilization rate of resources and reduce the loss of grain. Concrete steps will be taken as follows: Operation of scale in an appropriate degree will be carried out gradually and the intensification level of grain production raised where possible. Technologies will be actively popularized to lower grain production costs, reduce the waste of materials and improve grain production efficiency. The management of all grain production links -- sowing, harvesting, storage, transportation and processing -- will be improved and energy-saving machinery widely applied along with methods to prevent wastage. The quality of seeds will be improved and the quantity of seeds used will be reduced through selection, processing and coating. Harvesting should be further mechanized. Advanced grain-protection technology should be applied and new packaging technology and materials adopted for grain storage. Traditional transportation methods should be improved with the modernization of railways, highways and waterways. New technologies and equipment should be adopted to improve the technical properties of grain-processing machines.

综合开发利用和保护国土资源，实现农业可持续发展

 Comprehensively Developing, Utilizing and Protecting Land Resources for the Sustainable Development of Agriculture

    中国历来重视综合开发利用山地、水面、草原等国土资源，增加各类食品产量。今后，中国将继续坚持决不放松粮食生产，积极发展多种经营的方针，充分利用各种资源，更多地增加肉类、禽蛋、奶类、水产品、蔬菜、水果等食品的供给。同时，注意保护农业资源，改善生态环境，实现农业可持续发展。

    China has always attached great importance to comprehensive development and utilization of mountain areas, water surfaces, grasslands and other resources to increase the output of various foodstuffs. From now on, China will continue to adhere to the principle of ``never slackening grain production and actively developing a diversified economy,'' make full use of various resources and increase the supply of meat, eggs, milk products, aquatic products, vegetables and fruit. Meanwhile China should pay attention to the protection of agricultural resources and the improvement of the ecological environment to realize the sustainable development of agriculture.

    逐步建立符合中国资源特点的畜牧业生产结构。改革开放以来，中国食草型、节粮型动物食品生产发展较快，耗粮较多的猪肉占肉类的比重由1978年的90%以上降到目前的70%左右，牛羊禽肉的比重迅速提高。到2000年，牛羊禽肉比重将再提高10个百分点。在农区，主要利用农作物秸秆，养牛养羊；调整饲料结构，大力发展配合饲料和饲料添加剂生产，发展青绿饲料和南方水生饲料。在牧区，加强草地资源的开发、保护和利用，提高载畜能力，大规模进行草地改良和人工种草，发展饲草加工业，提高生产率。到2000年，肉类总产量达到5850万吨，人均45公斤，禽蛋总产量达到1750万吨，大体保持现有人均水平。

    Gradually setting up an animal husbandry production structure conforming to the characteristics of China's resources. Since the adoption of the policy of reform and opening to the outside world, the production of grass-eating and grain-saving animal foodstuffs has developed quickly. The proportion of pork -- which consumes a fairly large amount of grain -- in the total amount of meat fell from over 90 percent in 1978 to about 70 percent at present; and the proportions of beef, mutton and fowl meat rose rapidly. By 2000, the proportions of beef, mutton and fowl meat will increase by 10 percentage points each. In farming areas, crop stalks should be used mainly to feed cattle and sheep; forge structure should be adjusted, and great efforts made to develop the production of compound feed and feed additives, green feed and southern aquatic forage. In pastoral areas China should strengthen the exploitation, protection and utilization of grassland resources to improve its stock capacity, ameliorate grasslands and grow grass artificially on a large scale, develop the forage-processing industry and raise productivity. By 2000 China's total output of meat is expected to reach 58.5 million tons and that of eggs, 17.5 million tons. The amount of meat per capita will be 45 kg and that of eggs will remain approximately at the present per-capita level.

    加快开发利用浅海、滩涂和内陆水面。中国政府将继续坚持“以养殖为主，养殖、捕捞、加工并举”的方针，积极扩大内陆淡水养殖面积，进一步开发利用浅海滩涂，发展远洋捕捞。到2000年，水产品总量达到3200万吨，人均25公斤。

    Quickening the development and utilization of shallow offshore waters, beaches and inland waters. The Chinese government will persist in the principle of ``simultaneously developing aquaculture, fishing and processing, with emphasis on aquaculture,'' seek to expand the area for inland freshwater aquaculture, further utilize shallow offshore waters and beaches and develop deep-sea fishing. By 2000 the total output of aquatic products will reach 32 million tons -- 25 kg per capita.

    提高水果、蔬菜和木本食物供给水平。中国政府将采取措施，利用非耕地资源发展水果生产，支持农民利用房前屋后栽果、种菜，发展庭院经济。到2000年水果产量达到6200万吨，人均48公斤。巩固完善大中城市蔬菜生产基地，鼓励农区通过间作套种等多熟制栽培措施，发展蔬菜生产，稳定提高蔬菜均衡供给水平和有效供给能力。中国将加快宜农荒山开发，调整林地结构，逐步增加木本食物生产。

    Increasing the supply of fruit, vegetables and arbor foodstuffs. The Chinese government will take measures to develop fruit production by using non-cultivated land, encourage peasants to grow fruit trees and vegetables in front of and behind their houses and develop a courtyard economy. China will produce, by 2000, 62 million tons of fruit, 48 kg per capita. It will consolidate and perfect vegetable production bases around large and medium-sized cities, and encourage farming areas to expand vegetable production through intercropping, relay intercropping and oth er multi-harvest cultivation measures so as to improve the balanced supply of vegetables and enhance the capability for the effective supply of vegetables. In addition, the government is determined to speed up the reclamation of the barren hills suitable for farming, readjust the forestry structure step by step and increase the production of arbor foodstuffs.

    实现粮食生产的持续稳定增长，发展食物多样化生产，必须处理好人口、资源、环境的关系，加强农业资源管理，保护生态环境。八十年代以来，中国积极进行生态农业建设，寻求既能增产粮食等农产品，又能使生态环境得到改善的农业可持续发展模式：综合治理小流域水土流失面积6700多万公顷；建立了不同类型、县乡村不同规模的生态农业试点2000多个；在全国范围内开展了大规模的水土保持，建设平原农田防护林网，治理水土流失；组织实施了“三北”(东北、华北、西北)、长江中上游和沿海防护林等重大生态工程；在广大牧区采取退耕还牧，建设人工草场，防治沙漠化。这些措施对于改善中国的生态环境起到了积极作用。中国将继续加强生态农业建设，开展大规模的水土保持，综合治理小流域水土流失，防治土地荒漠化和草场退化，努力提高森林植被覆盖率。中国将在工业化和城市化进程中继续保护和改善农业自然环境：重点控制工业发展带来的环境污染，推广有利于防治工业污染的适用技术；积极发展农村新能源，努力减缓由于农村能源短缺造成的植被破坏和土质下降；加快水电建设，降低煤炭在能源结构中的比重，减轻酸雨和气候变暖对发展粮食生产的负面影响。

    To realize the sustained and stable growth of grain production and produce diversified foodstuffs China must handle well the relationship among population, resources and environment, strengthen the management of agricultural resources and protect the ecological environment. Since the 1980s China has made great efforts to conduct the construction of ecological agriculture and has tried every means to find a sustainable agricultural development mode that can not only increase the output of grain and other farm produce, but also help improve the ecological environment. In this period there has been a comprehensive improvement of soil erosion on over 67 million ha of land in small river valleys, and more than 2,000 experimental ecological agriculture stations of various sizes have been set up at the county, township and village levels. More"iover, China has unfolded large-scale projects for water and soil conservation throughout the country, and constructed a shelter-forest network for fields in the plains to control soil erosion. Important shelter-forest and other ecological projects in northeast, north and northwest China, on the middle and upper reaches of the Yangtze River and in coastal areas have taken shape. Pastoral areas have given up farming and restored animal husbandry when artificial grasslands have been constructed to prevent them from becoming deserts. All these measures have played active roles in improving China's ecological environment. China will continue to promote agricultural construction in an ecologically friendly way, start large-scale water and soil conservation, control soil erosion in small river valleys in a comprehensive way, prevent desertification and grassland deterioration, and strive to increase the coverage rate of forests. In the course of industrialization and urbanization China will continue to protect and improve the natural environment for agriculture. In this respect, it will focus on controlling environmental pollution brought about by industrial development, and popularize suitable technologies to help prevent and control industrial pollution. It will actively develop new sources of rural energy, try to slow down the destruction of vegetation and the deterioration of soil quality caused by the shortage of energy in rural areas. It will speed up the construction of hydropower facilities, reduce the proportion of coal in the energy structure, and combat the negative influences of acid rain and global warming.


深化体制改革，创造粮食生产、流通的良好政策环境

 Deepening Structural Reform and Creating a Favorable Policy Environment for Grain Production and Circulation

    近10多年来，中国的粮食生产和流通体制，以及政府对粮食供求与价格波动的调控方式等，已发生了深刻变化。中国政府将努力巩固和完善已有成果，并按照建立社会主义市场经济体制的要求，深化农业经济体制改革。

    In the past decade or so profound changes have taken place in China's grain production and circulation system, as well as in the government's regulation and control methods of grain supply and demand and price fluctuation. The Chinese government will work hard to consolidate and perfect the existing achievements, and will deepen the restructuring of the agricultural economy in accordance with the requirements for the building of a socialist market economy system:

    坚持长期稳定并不断完善农村基本经营制度。以家庭联产承包为主的责任制和统分结合的双层经营体制，是改革开放以来中国农村实行的基本经营制度，有效地促进了粮食等农产品生产的发展，保障了生产者的经营自主权和经济利益，受到了广大农民群众的衷心拥护。早在1983年，中国政府就明确宣布：现行的农村基本经营制度将长期坚持不变，农户向集体承包公有土地的经营期可以长达15年。1993年，中国政府又作出规定：在农户原有的土地承包期到期后，可再延长30年，在承包期内，农户对土地的经营使用权可以在不改变使用方向的前提下实行自愿、有偿转让。中国政府将继续鼓励在乡村和小城镇发展二、三产业，加快转移农业富余劳动力，促进具备条件的地方逐步实行耕地的适度规模经营，进一步提高粮食生产的经济效益，增强发展粮食生产的动力。

    Make the rural basic management systems stable for long periods of time and improve them continuously. The household contract responsibility system with remuneration linked to output and the two-layer management system featuring the integration of centralization and decentralization are the basic management systems Chinese rural areas have adopted since the initiation of the policy of reform and opening to the outside world. As these systems have effectively promoted the production of grain and other agricultural products, and safeguarded the producers' own decision-making power in management and their economic benefits, they have won the heartfelt support of the broad masses of farmers. In 1983 the Chinese government declared clearly that the existing rural basic management systems would remain unchanged for quite a long time to come, and the public land contracted out by the collectives to peasant households could be used by the latter for as long as 15 years. In 1993 the government made a decision that upon the expiration of a land contract the term could be extended for another 30 years and that during the contract term farmers could freely transfer the land use right with compensation, on condition that the way of its use remain unchanged. The Chinese government will continue to encourage rural areas and small towns to develop secondary and tertiary industries to speed up the absorption of the surplus rural labor force, propel the localities, where possible, to gradually implement operation of cultivated land on an appropriate scale, further improve the economic benefits of grain production and strengthen the motive force for grain production development.

    进一步改革与完善粮食流通体制。1985年，中国政府取消了粮食统一收购制度。目前粮食收购主要有四种形式：国家定购、国家议购、粮食加工企业在批发市场上购买和农民在集市上销售。在粮食销售方面，1993年全国城镇相继取消了定量计划供应的销售制度。在前两年市场零售物价涨幅较大的情况下，各地政府都规定城镇居民可以在国有粮店中购买一定数量的低于市场价格的粮食，国有粮店正越来越明显地起着保障城镇低收入者基本生活的作用。根据建立社会主义市场经济体制的要求，中国政府将着重在以下三个方面继续推进粮食流通体制的改革：一是尽快形成以市场定价为主的粮食价格形成机制，进一步发育和健全粮食市场体系，将粮食的地区间计划调拨逐步改为产、销区通过市场流通来实现各地区的供求平衡。对城乡低收入居民的粮食消费，各地将采取定向补贴等政策。二是加快国有粮食部门政策性业务与商业性经营分开的步伐，增强国有粮食流通企业的市场竞争能力。三是加快发展联结农户与市场的中介组织，引导和鼓励农民联合起来参与粮食流通。中国政府将采取一系列政策措施，促进粮食贸工农一体化经营，逐步建立以粮食为基础的高效农业体系，基本途径是，实行种植业和养殖业的复合发展，积极发展以种养业为原料的加工业和运销业，使粮食的生产、转化、加工和流通等环节紧密联结，多层次转化增值，提高粮食生产比较效益和农民收入，保证粮食生产的持续稳定发展。

    Further reforming and perfecting the grain circulation system. In 1985 the Chinese government abolished the state monopoly of purchase and marketing of grain. Now the following four methods are used to purchase grain: The state purchases grain through xed quotas; the state purchases grain through negotiations with producers; grain-processing enterprises purchase grain from the wholesale markets; and farmers sell their grain at fairs. In 1993 grain rationing was abolished in cities and towns throughout the country. As the retail prices of commodities on the market have increased by a large margin in the past two years governments at all levels have specified that urban residents might purchase a certain amount of grain from state-owned grain shops at prices lower than the market price. State-owned grain shops are playing a more and more important role in guaranteeing the basic livelihood of urban residents with low incomes. In accordance with the requirements for founding a socialist market economy system, the Chinese government will focus on continually propelling the reform of the grain circulation system in the following three respects. First, establishing a pricing mechanism as soon as possible, whereby grain prices are primarily decided by the market; further developing and improving the grain market system; and gradually changing the planned inter-regional allocation and transfer of grain to the practice whereby the producing and marketing regions achieve a balance between supply and demand among regions through market circulation. Subsidization and other policies will be adopted with regard to the grain consumption of urban and rural residents with low incomes. Second, China should speed up the separation of state-owned grain departments' policy-related business from commercial business to strengthen state-owned grain circulation enterprises' competitiveness in the market. Third, China will quicken the fostering of intermediaries linking the farmers with the market, and guiding and encouraging them to join hands and participate in grain circulation. The Chinese government will adopt a series of policy-related measures to promote the operation of grain by the integration of trade, industry and agriculture, and gradually set up a high-efficiency agricultural system with grain as the base. The basic method will be to realize co-development of crop cultivation, animal husbandry and aquaculture while actively developing transportation and marketing and the processing industry with raw materials derived from crop cultivation, animal husbandry and aquaculture so as to tightly link grain production with transfer, processing and circulation, add value by manifold ways, increase the comparative benets of grain production and the income of the farmers, and ensure the sustained, stable development of grain production.

    引导消费，减少浪费。中国政府将继续开展爱粮节粮宣传教育，并制定相应政策，促进在全社会形成“爱惜粮食光荣、浪费粮食可耻”的良好风尚。倡导文明、适度、节俭的消费方式，反对讲排场、摆阔气和铺张浪费，改革用餐方式，加强对餐饮业的管理。中国目前酒类构成中耗粮较多的烈性白酒比重过大，每年酿酒耗粮2000多万吨。中国政府将采取措施，减少高度白酒的生产，降低白酒在酒类中的比重。

    Guiding consumption and reducing waste. The Chinese government will continue to conduct education on treasuring and economizing on grain and formulate corresponding policies to promote the formation of a new social tendency that stresses thrift in grain and opposes waste and extravagance. The dietary pattern will be reformed; supervision of the catering industry will be tightened; and the production of alcoholic drinks made from grain -- at present consuming 20 million tons of grain a year -- will be curbed.

    加强对粮食市场的调控。中国是一个自然灾害较为频繁的国家，年度间的粮食产量波动难以避免，对粮食市场的稳定产生不利影响。为加强对粮食生产者的保护和稳定粮食市场，中国政府在1990年就着手建立了粮食的最低保护价格制度和用于调节粮食市场供求与价格的专项粮食储备制度，1994年又建立了中央和省两级粮食市场风险基金制度。几年的实践证明，这些制度发挥了积极的作用。今后将进一步完善这些制度，保持合理的粮食储备量，充实粮食市场风险基金，增强政府对粮食市场的吞吐调节能力。

    Strengthening the regulation and control of grain markets. China is a country with frequent natural disasters, so it is hard for it to avoid the fluctuation of grain output, which has an unfavorable impact on the stability of grain markets. To protect grain producers and stabilize grain markets the Chinese government started in 1990 to set up the minimum grain price protection system and the special grain reserve system for regulating supply and demand and the prices on grain markets. In 1994 a grain market risk fund system at the central and provincial levels was set up. Experience over the past few years has proved that these systems have played positive roles. China will further perfect these systems, maintain reasonable amounts of grain in reserve, replenish the grain market risk funds and reinforce the government's ability to regulate grain markets.

    适时、适度利用国际粮食市场，通过进出口贸易调节国内的粮食供求关系，也是稳定粮食市场所必需的。近年来，中国国内的市场粮食价格已逐步接近于国际市场粮价。为了保护农民的基本利益，中国政府将按照国际惯例，实行粮食进口关税政策。

    Making timely and appropriate use of the international grain market and regulating the relationship between the domestic grain supply and demand through import and export trade are also necessary for stabilizing grain markets. In recent years the grain prices on the domestic market have been approaching step by step those on the international market. To protect the farmers' basic interests the Chinese government will adopt the policy of imposing tariffs on imported grain according to the usual international practice.

    早在新中国成立前夕，西方就有人预言中国政府解决不了人民的吃饭问题，历史早已宣告此类预言的彻底破产。未来几十年，中国虽然面临耕地少、人口多、粮食需求压力大的现实，但也存在着巨大的发展潜力，中国有解决粮食问题的经验和办法，农民中蕴藏着巨大的生产积极性，完全有理由相信，中国政府和人民有能力依靠自己的力量解决粮食供给问题。实践将会向世界证明：中国人民不仅能养活自己，而且还将使自己的生活质量一年比一年提高。中国不但不会对世界粮食安全构成威胁，还将为世界粮食发展作出更大的贡献。

    On the eve of the founding of New China some Westerners predicted that the Chinese government would not be able to solve the problem of feeding the country's population. History has already shown the futility of such a prediction. In the coming decades, though China will be confronted with the reality of less cultivated land, a large population and great demand for grain, there exists huge potential for development. The Chinese government has experience and has developed methods for solving the grain problem, and the peasants have a vast reservoir of enthusiasm for production. It can be believed with full reasons that the Chinese government and people have the ability to solve the problem of grain supply by relying on their own efforts. Practice will prove to the world: The Chinese people can not only feed themselves, but also make their quality of life better and better year by year. Instead of forming a threat to the world's grain supply, China will make ever greater contributions to it.
一九九六年中国人权事业的进展
Progress in China's Human Rights Cause in 1996 

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China

一九九七年三月·北京
March 1997, Beijing 

目   录
Contents

人民的生存权和发展权
People's Rights to Subsistence and Development

公民的民主权利
 Citizens' Democratic Rights

人权的司法保障
 Judicial Guarantee for Human Rights

劳动者权利的保障
 Protection of Workers' Rights

公民的受教育权
 Citizens' Rights to Receive Education

妇女、儿童的合法权益
 Legitimate Rights and Interests of Women and Children

少数民族的权利保障
 Guarantee of the Rights of Ethnic Minorities

 

    1996年是中国实施国民经济和社会发展第九个五年计划的开局之年，也是中国人权事业继续取得进展的一年。在这一年里，中国国民经济持续、快速、健康发展，民主和法制建设明显加强，人权状况继续保持并进一步呈现出不断改善的良好态势。

    The year 1996 was the first year of implementation of the Ninth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development, and also a year that witnessed continued advances in China's human rights cause. Last year, China's national economy maintained steady, rapid and sound growth, the efforts to build up democracy and a legal system were notably strengthened, and the human rights conditions maintained a good momentum of continuous improvement and promised further progress.

人民的生存权和发展权

People's Rights to Subsistence and Development

　　1996年，中国国民经济继续高速发展，国内生产总值达到67795亿元，按可比价格计算，比1995年增长9.7%。在此基础上，人民的生存权和发展权得到了明显的改善。

    In 1996, China's national economy continued its rapid growth. The gross domestic product (GDP) reached over 6,779.5 billion yuan, representing an increase of 9.7 percent over the previous year, calculated in terms of comparable prices. Based on this, the people's rights to earn a living and develop recorded a marked improvement.

　　城乡居民收入稳步增长，生活水平普遍提高。1996年，城镇居民人均生活费收入达到4377元，比上年实际增长3.3%；农村居民人均纯收入1926元，实际增长9%，是近年来增幅最高的一年。城乡居民储蓄存款1996年末达到38500多亿元，比1995年末增加8800多亿元。城乡新建住房11亿平方米，居民的居住条件显著改善。城乡市场繁荣，消费品供应丰富，价格比较稳定，全社会消费品零售总额达到24614亿元，实际增长12.5%。据国家统计局抽样调查，1996年全国城镇居民人均消费支出3919元，其中人均购买食品支出1905元，反映食品消费比重的“恩格尔系数”为48.6%，比上年下降了1.3个百分点，向2000年所要达到的45%的目标又前进了一步。“恩格尔系数”的下降，标志着人们的生活质量有了新的提高。

    The standards of living for urban and rural people improved nationwide with the steady increase of people's income. In 1996, the average per capita income for living expenses reached 4,377 yuan for city and township dwellers, an increase of 3.3 percent over 1995 in real terms. The average per capita net income of rural residents came to 1,926 yuan, a rise of nine percent over 1995 in real terms -- the biggest increase of the past few years. Savings deposits of urban and rural residents topped 3,850 billion yuan at the end of 1996, over 880 billion yuan more than the year before. New housing for urban and rural residents totaling 1.1 billion square meters of floor space was completed, and people's housing conditions were significantly improved. The market was brisk, with the supply of a wide variety of consumer goods at fairly stable prices. The volume of total retail sales of consumer goods reached 2,461.4 billion yuan, increasing by 12.5 percent in real terms. According to a sample survey of the State Statistics Bureau, the per capita consumption expenses of urban dwellers reached 3,919 yuan in 1996. Of that amount, 1,905 yuan was spent on food. The "Engel's coefficient" which indicates the ratio between the expenses of food and other items of consumption, came to 48.6, or 1.3 percentage points lower than the previous year and a step closer to the goal of 45 percent set for the year of 2000. The drop of the "Engel's coefficient" signified a new improvement in people's quality of life.

　　中国在普遍提高人民整体生活水平的同时，一直高度重视解决贫困人口的温饱问题。改革开放以来，中国政府在全国范围内大力开展扶贫开发工作，使贫困人口连年大幅度减少。1996年，中国农村又有700万贫困人口解决了温饱问题，全国农村贫困人口已由1978年的2.5亿减少到5800万，十八年来脱贫人口近2亿；中国贫困人口占世界贫困人口的比例由七十年代末的四分之一减少到目前的不足二十分之一。通过十多年来的扶贫开发，贫困地区还累计解决了3961万人、4629万头大牲畜饮水困难，兴修公路25.8万公里，架设输变电线路27.4万公里，兴办乡镇企业5万多个。同时，贫困地区的文化、教育、卫生事业也有了较大的发展。仅1995年，贫困地区就新建小学2504所、卫生院587所。在这方面，社会各界开展的救助贫困母亲的“幸福工程”、帮助贫困地区失学儿童的“希望工程”、资助贫困地区失学女童的“春蕾计划”、提高贫困地区儿童医疗条件的“博爱工程”等，发挥了很大的作用。

    While seeking universal improvement of the people's overall living standard, China has been paying great attention to meeting people's basic need for food and clothing. Since the initiation of reform and opening-up, the Chinese government launched vigorously a nationwide operation to seek development and provide assistance for the people in poverty-stricken areas, which helped reduce the poverty-stricken population in great numbers for many successive years. In 1996, an additional seven million rural poverty-stricken people met their basic need for food and clothing. The country's total poverty-stricken population had dropped from 250 million in 1978 to 58 million. In the past 18 years, nearly 200 million rural people had shaken off poverty. By the end of the 1970s, the number of China's poverty-stricken people accounted for one-fourth of the world's total, while the ratio is now less than one-twentieth. After more than 10 years' efforts in development-oriented poverty-relief programs in the underdeveloped areas, the drinking water problems for 39.61 million people and 46.29 million head of cattle have been solved in the poverty-stricken areas. In addition, 258,000 kilometers of highways have been built, 274,000 kilometers of power transmission lines installed, and more than 50,000 rural enterprises established. In the meantime, the poverty-stricken areas also made substantial progress in cultural, educational and public health undertakings. In 1995 alone, 2,504 primary schools and 587 clinics were built in these areas. A number of poverty-relief campaigns were launched by people in all walks of life and have played big roles in proverty relief. They include the "Happiness Project" designed to help poverty-stricken mothers; the "Hope Project" aimed at helping dropouts in poverty-stricken areas; the "Spring Bud Program" specially to aid girl dropouts; and the "Love of Humanity Project" meant to improve health care for children in the poverty-stricken areas.

　　有资料表明，中国是世界上贫困人口减少最快的国家。在过去的二十年里，世界上最不发达的贫困国家，已经从27个增加到48个。在最近的五年里，全世界最贫困的人口从10亿增加到13亿，目前还在以每年2500万人的速度增加。在发展中国家，每年有1000万人以上的人口死于饥饿或营养不良。相比之下，自1978年以来，中国的贫困人口以平均每年1000万的速度减少，目前正致力于在本世纪末消除全国的贫困人口。尽管中国还面临很大困难，但中国政府和人民有决心有信心如期实现扶贫攻坚的目标。中国在扶贫开发方面所作出的努力和取得的成就受到有关国际组织和人士的普遍赞誉。世界银行认为：“中国政府为帮助最落后的农村地区摆脱贫困作了极大的努力，这种努力比其他许多发展中国家所作的努力要成功得多。”

    Statistics show that China is the country which has witnessed the quickest decrease in its poverty-stricken population. In the past 20 years, however, the number of seriously underdeveloped countries in the world has increased from 27 to 48. In the past five years, the total number of the world's poorest population has risen from 1 billion to 1.3 billion, and the figure is climbing by 25 million each year. In the developing countries, more than 10 million people die from hunger or malnutrition every year. In contrast, China's poverty-stricken population decreases by 10 million every year. China is also working to enable all of its poverty-stricken people to shake off poverty by the end of this century. Although China is still facing great difficulties, the Chinese government and people are determined and confident of their ability to achieve the goal of lifting all of the nation's poor people out of poverty on schedule. China's development-oriented aid-the-poor work and achievements in poverty-stricken areas have been universally praised by international organizations and noted figures concerned. The World Bank believes that "the Chinese government has made painstaking efforts toward poverty alleviation in the most backward rural areas. These efforts proved to be much more successful than those made by many other developing countries."

    公民的民主权利

     Citizens' Democratic Rights

    中国在发展经济的同时，大力推进社会主义民主政治建设，巩固和完善了人民代表大会制度、中国共产党领导的多党合作和政治协商制度，加强了基层民主建设，从而使公民的民主权利得到了进一步的保障。

    While developing its economy, China has made energetic efforts to promote the building of a socialist democratic and political system, consolidated and perfected the people's congress system and the system of multi-party cooperation and political consultation under the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party, and improved democracy at grass-roots units, thus further guaranteeing citizens' democratic rights.

　　人民代表大会制度是中国的根本政治制度。全国人民代表大会是国家最高权力机关，决定国家的大政方针，制定国家基本法律。1996年，全国人民代表大会听取和审议了国务院、最高人民法院、最高人民检察院的工作报告；审查和批准了《国民经济和社会发展“九五”计划和2010年远景目标纲要》；审议通过了20个法律和有关法律问题的决定，加强了对公民权利的法律保护。与此同时，全国人大加强了执法检查监督工作。八届全国人大常委会先后对17部法律的实施情况进行了检查，各专门委员会分别对13部法律的实施情况进行了检查。1996年，由八位副委员长负责，组织了21个执法检查组，到全国各地进行执法监督和检查，检查了农业法、教育法、环境保护法、劳动法和关于加强社会治安综合治理的决定的实施情况，对有关法律的贯彻实施发挥了督促作用。全国人大注意保障代表的权利，对代表们提出的建议和意见认真及时地处理。1997年全国人大八届五次会议期间，共收到代表议案700件，其中140件根据大会主席团决定交有关专门委员会审议，其他560件议案连同代表提出的1289件建议和意见，已分别交有关部门和单位办理，并负责向代表作出答复。

    The people's congress system serves as China's fundamental political system. The National People's Congress (NPC), the supreme state power organ, decides fundamental state policies and principles, and formulates basic national laws. In 1996, the NPC heard and deliberated the work reports of the State Council, the Supreme People's Court and the Supreme People's Procuratorate; and examined and approved the Ninth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development and the Outline for the Long-Range Objective Through the Year 2010. It also deliberated and adopted 20 laws and decisions concerning legal issues, and strengthened legal protection of citizens' rights. In the meantime, the NPC has tight"iened inspection of and supervision over law enforcement. To date, the Eighth NPC Standing Committee has inspected the enforcement of 17 laws. Various special NPC committees have examined the implementation of 13 laws. In 1996, led by eight vice-chairmen of the NPC Standing Committee, 21 law-enforcement inspection groups were organized to tour the country to supervise and inspect the enforcement of laws, including the Agriculture Law, the Education Law, the Environmental Protection Law, the Labor Law and the Decision on Strengthening Comprehensive Management of Social Security, thus playing a supervisory role in implementing relevant laws. The NPC pays close attention to safeguarding the rights of its deputies, and earnestly and promptly handles proposals and suggestions made by its deputies. During the Fifth Session of the Eighth NPC held in 1997, 700 motions proposed by the deputies were received, 140 of which were submitted to relevant special committees for examination in accordance with the decision of the session's presidium. The other 560 motions and the 1,289 proposals and suggestions made by the deputies were submitted to relevant departments and units, which are responsible for replying to the deputies.

中国共产党领导的多党合作和政治协商制度是中国民主政治制度的重要组成部分。
The system of multi-party cooperation and political consultation led by the Chinese Communist Party is an important component of China's democratic and political system. 

各民主党派和政协组织在政治协商、民主监督和参政议政方面，发挥着日益重要的作用。
Various non-Communist parties and Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) organizations are playing an increasingly important role in political consultation, democratic supervision and the participation in and deliberation of state affairs. 

从1989年中共十三届四中全会到1996年底，中共中央就国家大政方针、国家领导人选以及各项重大决策、法律、法规，同各民主党派中央、全国工商联和无党派人士举行了100多次各种形式的协商活动。1996年，全国政协提出的关于落实“九五”计划大政方针、减轻农民负担、草原畜牧业发展、卫生改革以及加强精神文明建设和民主法制建设的调查报告或建议共41条，分别被中共中央、国务院在制定有关政策、规章时采纳。与此同时，全国政协切实加强提案工作，积极反映社情民意。全国政协委员们积极谏言献策，提案逐年递增，从八届一次会议的1900件增加到八届五次会议的2426件，五年共提出一万多件。全国政协八届四次会议委员提案2380件，截至1997年2月14日，办复2334件，占98.1%，问题得到解决和计划解决的1937件，占83%；因条件限制难于较快解决的问题，各承办单位作了认真的说明。
From the Fourth Plenum of the 13th Chinese Communist Party Central Committee, which was held in 1989, to the end of 1996, the Party Central Committee conducted more than 100 consultative activities of various forms on various fundamental state policies and principles, on the candidates for state leaders, and on various important policy decisions, laws and regulations with the central committees of various non-Communist parties, the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce and personages without party affiliation. In 1996, 41 investigation reports or proposals were made by the CPPCC National Committee on implementing the fundamental policies and principles for the Ninth Five-Year Plan, reducing farmers' financial burdens, developing animal husbandry on grasslands, reforming public health undertakings, and promoting ethical and cultural progress and the building of democracy and a legal system. The reports and proposals were adopted either by the Party Central Committee or the State Council in formulating relevant policies and regulations. Meanwhile, the CPPCC National Committee took effective steps to do a better job of putting forward proposals and actively reflect social conditions and popular feelings. Members of the CPPCC National Committee have actively aired views and offered advices, and increased the number of their proposals year by year, from 1,900 during the First Session of the Eighth CPPCC National Committee to 2,426 during the Committee's Fifth Session. Within this period, more than 10,000 proposals were put forth. During the Fourth Session of the Eighth CPPCC National Committee, members put forward 2,380 proposals. By February 14, 1997, 2,334 proposals had been handled, or 98.1 percent of the total. Of those handled, 1,937 proposals, or 83 percent of the total, have been solved or will be solved according to plan. With regard to the problems that cannot be solved promptly because of constraints, various executive units have offered explanations.

中国积极推进城乡基层民主建设，保障城乡居民的民主权利。
China has made vigorous efforts to promote the building of democracy in grass-roots units in urban and rural areas to guarantee the democratic rights of the residents there. 
在农村，继续开展以村民民主选举、民主决策、民主管理、民主监督为主要内容的农村基层群众性自治活动。
In rural areas, efforts have been made to continue to conduct rural grass-roots mass self-management activities that focus on villagers' democratic elections, democratic policy-making, democratic management and democratic supervision. 

1996年，全国绝大部分省、自治区、直辖市的农村村民委员会，采取村民直接投票选举产生的办法，进行了新一轮选举。许多地方实行每一个有选举权的村民都有权提名候选人，由村民大会或村民代表无记名投票表决、进行预选的方式确定正式候选人；候选人进行竞选；划票时，设立秘密划票间。村民委员会将村务定期或不定期地向村民公开。如河北省，截至1996年，全省50430个村已有50191个村实行了不同形式、不同程度的村务公开，内容包括村级财务开支、征购提留、宅基地发放、电价电费、计划生育、干部任期目标等六项。村务公开，扩大了村民民主管理、民主监督村内事务的权利。在城市，继续建立健全了城镇居民委员会组织及其下属机构，全国98%以上的居民区都按照法定程序建立了居民委员会。1996年，绝大多数居委会采取由居民直接投票的办法，依法进行了换届选举。各地居民委员会进一步健全居民会议制度，居民区的重要事务由居民会议决定。据对127个城市抽样调查，每个居委会平均每年召开居民会议10次以上。基层民主建设是中国人民民主的一个重要体现，国际上了解中国实际情况而不带偏见的人，都对中国的基层民主建设作了充分的肯定。

In 1996, rural villagers' committees in most provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the central government carried out a new round of elections by adopting the method by which villagers could directly cast votes to elect the committees. Many places adopted the method by which every eligible voter in villages has the right to nominate candidates, and the villagers' congresses or representatives of villagers select formal candidates by secret ballot and through preliminary elections. Candidates must run for elections. Voters will mark their ballots in specially-designated rooms. Villagers' committees regularly or periodically make public the affairs of the village to the villagers. For example, by the end of 1996 in Hebei Province, 50,191 of the 50,430 villages throughout the province had made public village affairs in various forms and to varying extent, including six items such as financial expenditures at the village level, grain purchased by the state and the accumulation and retention of common funds by the collective, the granting of plots for housing construction, electricity rates and charges, family planning and objectives of village cadres during their terms. Publicizing village affairs has increased the rights of villagers to exercise democratic management of and democratic supervision over villagers affairs. In cities, urban neighborhood committees and their subsidiary organizations continued to be set up and perfected. More than 98 percent of the residential areas all over the country have established neighborhood committees in accordance with legal procedures. In 1996, the overwhelming majority of neighborhood committees carried out, according to law, elections of new committees by adopting the method of directly casting votes by residents. Neighborhood committees have further perfected the residents' meeting system. Important affairs concerning the residential areas are decided by residents' meetings. A sample survey of 127 cities shows that on average, every neighborhood committee holds at least ten residents' meetings a year. The building of democracy at grassroots levels serves as an important reflection of democracy enjoyed by the Chinese people. All the overseas people who have no prejudice but have a good understanding of China's actual situation have fully acknowledged the building of democracy at grassroots levels in China.

人权的司法保障

 Judicial Guarantee for Human Rights

    一年多来，中国修改了《刑法》和《刑事诉讼法》，颁布实施了《律师法》、《行政处罚法》等法律，并采取其他许多措施，加强了人权的司法保障。

      During the past year and more, China has revised its Criminal Law and Criminal Procedure Law, promulgated and enforced new laws such as the Lawyers Law and the Law on Administrative Punishment, and taken many other measures to strengthen the judicial guarantee for human rights.

中国依法打击严重刑事犯罪活动，切实保障人民的人权和生命财产安全。
China has cracked down on serious criminal offences in accordance with law, and earnestly guaranteed the people's human rights and safety of lives and property. 

1996年，公安、司法机关在全国范围内对杀人、抢劫、强奸、绑架勒索、重大盗窃等严重危害社会治安的刑事犯罪，特别是对涉枪犯罪、带黑社会性质的集团犯罪以及流氓恶势力犯罪，依法进行了严厉打击。这些犯罪活动危害社会治安，严重侵犯公民的人身、生命和财产安全，为全国人民所深恶痛绝。公安、司法机关依法惩处了一批罪大恶极的犯罪分子。据统计，1996年全国法院共判处暴力犯罪、涉枪犯罪、集团犯罪等严重危害社会治安的刑事犯罪分子322382人。“严打”维护了社会稳定和全国人民的人权，得到人民群众的热烈拥护。
In 1996, public security and judicial departments launched, according to law, a severe nationwide crackdown on criminal offences seriously endangering public security, such as homicides, robberies, rape, kidnapping and blackmail, and major theft, with emphasis placed on crimes involving the use of guns, crimes with gangster connections and characteristics, and crimes committed by rogues and vicious social forces. These criminal activities have endangered public security, gravely infringed on the citizens' personal safety, lives and property, and are abhored by the people across the country. In accordance with law, public security and judicial departments have punished a number of criminals guilty of the most heinous crimes. Statistics show that in 1996, courts throughout the country sentenced 322,382 criminal offenders who had seriously endangered public security by committing crimes of violence, crimes involving the use of guns, and gang-related crimes. The severe crackdown on crimes has safeguarded social stability and the human rights of the people all over the country, and won the heartfelt support of the general public.

1997年3月，全国人大八届五次会议对1979年制定的《刑法》进行了修订，使《刑法》由原来的192条增加到452条，增加了260条。修订后的《刑法》进一步明确了罪刑法定、法律面前人人平等、罪刑相当三项基本原则，规定：“法律没有明文规定为犯罪行为的，不得定罪处刑”；“对于任何人犯罪，在适用法律上一律平等”；“刑罚的轻重，应当与犯罪分子所犯罪行和承担的刑事责任相适应”。这三项原则进一步完善了中国的法治原则，有利于司法公正和保护当事人的合法权利。与此同时，修订后的《刑法》把一些原来没有规定的犯罪根据现实情况作了明文规定。如将原来的流氓罪分解为侮辱妇女、聚众淫乱、聚众斗殴、寻衅滋事四种犯罪，增加了黑社会犯罪、煽动民族仇恨罪、证券欺诈犯罪、危害国防利益罪等。另外，还把“反革命罪”修改为“危害国家安全罪”，将原来反革命罪规定中实际属于普通犯罪性质的，都规定按普通刑事犯罪追究。《刑法》的修订和实施，为惩治犯罪，维护国家安全和人民的人权提供了更加有力的法律武器。

      In March of 1997, the Fifth Session of the Eighth National People's Congress made amendments to the Criminal Law enacted in 1979. The amended Criminal Law has 452 articles, an increase of 260 over the previous 192 articles. The amended Criminal Law has further defined three basic principles, namely, "conviction and penalty according to law", "equality of everyone before the law", and "punishment commensurate with the crime". It stipulates: "there should be no conviction or penalty if an act is not explicitly defined as a criminal act by the law", "all criminal offenders are equal in applying laws" and that "the severity of penalty should be commensurate with the offender's crime and due criminal liabilities". These three principles have further improved China's rinciple of rule of law, and are conducive to judicial fairness and to the protection of the legitimate rights of the litigants. Meanwhile, the amended Criminal Law has made explicit stipulations in accordance with reality on some new crimes not defined previously. For instance, the previous offence of indecent activities has now been classified into four crimes, namely, molestation of women, gang-bang, gang brawls, and provoking fights and quarrels and making trouble, while new crimes including mafia crimes, instigation of hatred among people of ethnic groups, securities frauds, and endangerment of the interests of national defense have been added into the law. Moreover, the "counter-revolutionary crime" has been revised into "the crime of jeopardizing state security", while it is stipulated that all those offences, which used to fall under the category of "counter-revolutionary crime" but virtually have the nature of ordinary crimes, should be punished as ordinary criminal offences. The amendment and enforcement of the Criminal Law have provided a more powerful legal weapon for punishing crimes, safeguarding national security, and protecting human rights of the people.

　　中国重视规范行政、执法部门的行为，保护公民的合法权利不受侵犯。继《行政诉讼法》、《国家赔偿法》颁布实施之后，1996年3月中国又颁布了《行政处罚法》，从制度上规范了政府的行政处罚行为。检察机关十分重视查办发生在党政领导机关、行政执法机关、司法机关和经济管理部门的犯罪案件。据统计，检察机关1996年共立案侦查贪污、贿赂、挪用公款等犯罪大案34879件，渎职和侵犯公民人身权利、民主权利犯罪大案4864件。

      China has paid close attention to standardizing the practice of administrative and law-enforcement departments, so as to protect citizens' legitimate rights from any infringement. Following the promulgation and enforcement of the Administrative Procedure Law and the Law on State Compensation, in March of 1996 China promulgated the Law on Administrative Punishment, thus standardizing in terms of system the act of administrative punishment by the governments. The procuratorial bodies have attached great importance to the investigation and handling of criminal cases involving leading organs of the Party and the governments, administrative law-enforcement departments, judicial departments, and economic management departments. Statistics reveal that in 1996, the procuratorial bodies put on record and investigated 34,879 major criminal cases that involved embezzlement, bribery and misappropriation of public funds, as well as 4,864 major cases of malfeasance and infringement of citizens' personal and democratic rights.

    为了加强在公安、司法工作各个环节中对人权的保障，1996年，中国对1979年制定的《刑事诉讼法》作了重大修正，完善了刑事司法程序，增加了保护公民权利的规定。一是更加具体地保障了无罪的人不受刑事追究，规定“未经人民法院依法判决，对任何人都不得确定有罪”。人民法院对证据不足，不能认定被告人有罪的，应当作出指控犯罪不能成立的无罪判决。二是取消了作为行政强制措施的收容审查制度，进一步规范了传唤、拘传、拘留等强制措施，明确规定“传唤、拘传持续的时间最长不得超过十二小时。不得以连续传唤、拘传的形式变相拘禁犯罪嫌疑人。”三是扩大了律师的参与，规定“犯罪嫌疑人在被侦查机关第一次讯问后或者采取强制措施之日起，可以聘请律师为其提供法律咨询、代理申诉、控告”。“公诉案件自案件移送审查起诉之日起，犯罪嫌疑人有权委托辩护人”。四是强化了对被害人的权利保障，将被害人列为当事人，并赋予其一定的起诉权，请求立案监督权，申请回避、委托诉讼代理人的权利，请求抗诉权，庭审活动中的诉讼权利等。

    To strengthen the protection of human rights in various links of the public security and judicial work, China in 1996 made significant revisions to the Criminal Procedure Law enacted in 1979, thus perfecting the criminal judicial procedure and adding stipulations on protecting citizens' rights. First, the amended Criminal Procedure Law has protected in a more specific way innocent people from criminal penalties, by stipulating that "no one should be convicted guilty before the people's court passes a ruling according to law", and that the people's court should pass a ruling of "not guilty" and should decide that the charges are to be dropped if it doesn't have sufficient evidence to convict the defendant. Second, the law has abolished the system of detention for interrogation as a mandatory administrative measure, and further standardized mandatory measures such as summons, summons for detention and holding in custody. It explicitly stipulates that "the longest time for summons and summons for detention shall not exceed 12 hours", and that "it is forbidden to take criminal suspects into custody in disguised forms through continuous summons or summons for detention". Third, the law has increased lawyers' involvement in the criminal procedure with the stipulations that "after being interrogated for the first time or from the date when the investigative organs take any mandatory measures, criminal suspects can hire lawyers as their legal consultants and representatives of appeals and charges", and that "a criminal suspect in a case of public charge has the right to entrust defenders from the date when the case is transferred for examination and prosecution". Fourth, the law has intensified the guarantee for the rights of the victims, by listing them as the litigants and granting them a series of rights. These include a certain right of prosecution, the right to ask for putting their cases on record and supervision, the right to apply for a withdrawal and to entrust a legal representative, and the right to plead for an objection to the court's decision, as well as procedural rights during court hearings.

    各级法院以学习贯彻修正后的《刑事诉讼法》、推进刑事审判方式改革为重心，全面改革和完善审判方式，依法强化了庭审功能、合议庭和独立审判员的职责，加强了对人民群众合法权益的保护。与此同时，检察机关加大执法监督的力度，特别是加大了对少数公安、司法人员滥用职权、不依法办事现象的查处工作。在侦查监督工作中重点纠正有案不立、有罪不究、以罚代刑问题。1996年共对侦查工作中的违法情况提出纠正意见15565件次。在刑事审判监督工作中，对审判活动中的违法情况提出纠正意见2422件次；对认为确有错误的刑事判决、裁定，依法提出抗诉2405件。检察机关在工作中，重视保护犯罪嫌疑人、被告人和其他当事人以及服刑人犯的合法权利，严肃查办司法、执法人员刑讯逼供、非法拘禁等犯罪案件。检察机关还依法改变确有错误的批捕、免诉、撤案等决定570件；依法受理刑事赔偿案379件，已办结110件，决定给予赔偿44件。

      Courts at various levels, focusing on studying the amended Criminal Procedure Law and promoting the reform of court trial procedures, have comprehensively reformed and improved the country's trial system. They have intensified the functions of court hearings, the duty and responsibilities of intercollegiate benches and individual jurors in accordance with the law, and strengthened the protection of legitimate rights and interests of the people. In the meantime, procuratorial bodies have stepped up their efforts to supervise law enforcement, especially to investigate and punish a small number of public security and judiciary personnel who abused power and did not act in accordance with the law. In the supervision over crime investigation, emphasis has been placed on redressing the problems of refusing to register existing cases or to investigate offenses, and of replacing punishments with fines. In 1996, 15,565 rectification opinions were put forth against the conduct of violating laws in investigating crimes. In the supervision over criminal proceedings, 2,422 correction opinions were put forth against the conduct of violating laws. Procuratorial bodies also protested 2,405 court decisions and rulings according to law, which they regarded as really wrong. Procuratorial bodies have in their work paid close attention to the protection of legitimate rights of criminal suspects, defendants, other litigants and even criminals who are serving a jail term, and to earnest investigation and punishment of such crimes as forced confession and illegal custody committed by judicial and law enforcement personnel. Procuratorial bodies, in accordance with law, also changed 570 wrong decisions on arrest warrants, exemption from prosecution and case withdrawal. They handled 379 cases of criminal compensation according to law, concluded 110 of them, and decided to grant compensation to the victims in 44 of the cases.

中国的律师队伍发展迅速，已成为维护公民合法权益的一支重要力量。
China's contingent of lawyers has grown rapidly, and has become a major force in safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of citizens.

1996年5月15日通过的《中华人民共和国律师法》明确规定，律师是“依法取得律师执业证书，为社会提供法律服务的执业人员”，并相应地规定了律师执业条件、业务、权利和义务等内容。《律师法》的颁布实施，对保障律师的合法权利和依法执业，维护当事人的合法权益和法律的正确实施，具有重要意义。据统计，1996年，全国律师行业从业人员已达到10多万人，比上年增加1.2万人，增长12.6%；律师事务所达到8265家，比上年增加1065家，增长14.8%。1996年，全国律师应聘担任政府和企业法律顾问25.4万多家，比上年增长8.7%；承办刑事辩护和刑事代理25.1万多件，比上年增长23.1%，是近年来增长最多的一年；承办民事诉讼代理38.9万件，比上年增长23.2%；承办经济诉讼代理案件38.1万多件，比上年增长17.2%；承办行政诉讼代理案件2.3万多件，比上年增长28.4%；办理非诉讼法律事务45.5万多件，比上年增长0.8%。
The Lawyers Law of the People's Republic of China, adopted on May 15, 1996, explicitly stipulates that ``lawyers are professionals who, with a lawyer's license obtained according to law, provide legal services to society.'' It contains relevant provisions on the qualifications for working lawyers, their business lines, rights, obligations and other areas. The promulgation and implementation of the Lawyers Law is of great significance to the safeguarding of lawyers' legitimate rights and their operation according to law, protection of the legitimate rights and interests of litigants and the correct implementation of laws. According to statistics, the number of employees in the lawyers profession nationwide exceeded 100,000 in 1996, 12,000 or 12.6 percent more than in the previous year; and the number of lawyers' offices reached 8,265, up 1,065 or 14.8 percent. In 1996, lawyers across the country served as consultants for 254,000 government institutions and enterprises, 8.7 percent more than in the previous year; served in 251,000 criminal cases as defending lawyers or agents ad litem, up 23.1 percent, the biggest increase in recent years. They also handled 389,000 civil lawsuits, an increase of 23.2 percent; more than 381,000 economic lawsuits, up 17.2 percent; 23,000 administrative lawsuits, up 28.4 percent; 455, 000 cases involving non-lawsuit legal matters, an increase of 0.8 percent.

　　中国是犯罪率比较低的国家。1996年，全国刑事案件比上年下降5.4%，杀人、伤害、抢劫、盗窃等几类主要犯罪案件均比上年有所下降。

      China is a country with a relatively low crime rate. In 1996, its crime rate dropped 5.4 percent from the previous year. The number of major categories of crimes such as homicides, injuries to human bodies, robberies and thefts all dropped from the previous year.

劳动者权利的保障

 Protection of Workers' Rights

中国重视劳动者权利的保障。
China attaches great importance to protection of workers' rights. 

一年来，政府为保护《劳动法》规定的平等就业、取得劳动报酬、休息休假、获得劳动安全卫生保护、接受职业技能培训、享受社会保险和福利等权利，作出了新的努力。
In the past year the government has made new efforts to safeguard the rights stipulated by China's Labor Law, such as equal access for employment, salary, rest and vacations, work safety and health protection, job training, social security and welfare.

　　目前，全国已有职业介绍机构31000所，就业服务中心2716所，失业保险机构2000多个，劳动就业服务企业20多万户，在劳动就业服务企业的从业人数达900多万人。1996年全国约有1000万人在职业介绍机构的帮助下走上就业岗位。中国的城镇失业率为3%左右。

      China now has 31,000 employment agencies, 2,716 job service centers, and more than 2,000 unemployment insurance bodies. And more than 200,000 labor service enterprises have been established throughout the country, employing more than nine million people. In 1996, about ten million people found jobs with the help of employment agencies, and the unemployment rate in cities and towns was around three percent.

    为了保障劳动者的最低工资水平，近年来，政府颁布了《企业最低工资规定》和《关于实施最低工资保障制度的通知》，对最低工资标准的确定和调整、最低工资的支付以及违反该制度的法律责任等作了明确规定。目前，全国除西藏以外的各省、自治区、直辖市都颁布实施了本地区的最低工资标准，初步建立了适合中国国情的最低工资保障制度。此外，为确保劳动者按时足额取得合法收入，政府还颁布了《工资支付暂行规定》及其《补充规定》。

      To ensure the minimum wage standard for workers, the government has in recent years issued the Regulations on Minimum Wages for Enterprises, and a notice on implementing the system to ensure minimum wages, which clearly stipulate the fixing and adjusting of the minimum standards of wages, the payment of the wages, and the legal liabilities for those who violate the regulations. To date, all the provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities except Tibet have issued and implemented the lowest standards for wages in their own areas, thus establishing, by and large, a minimum-wage guarantee system that complies with China's actual conditions. Moreover, the government has also promulgated the Provisional Regulations on Wage Payment and a set of additional regulations to ensure the workers to get their legitimate payment on time and in full.

　　为切实保障劳动者的安全和健康，中国颁布实施了《〈矿山安全法〉实施条例》和《重大事故隐患管理规定》，增加了改善劳动条件的资金投入，每年投入2000多万元用于企业劳动保护技术改造，研制、开发新型劳动防护用品。同时，加强了对劳动安全的监察与管理，督促企业不断改善劳动条件，给劳动者创造安全卫生的劳动环境。近年来，中国企业伤亡事故，特别是重大、特大事故呈下降趋势。

      To protect workers' safety and health, China has issued the Regulations Regarding the Implementation of the Mine Safety Law, and the Regulations Regarding Management of Hidden Causes for Accidents, and increased funding in the improvement of working conditions. More than 20 million yuan has been invested each year in upgrading enterprise labor protection techniques, and in researching and developing new labor protection products. In the meantime, the government has increased supervision and management of labor safety by urging enterprises to continuously improve work conditions to create a safe and hygienic work environment for laborers. In recent years, the incidence of fatal accidents, especially major and extraordinarily big accidents, has declined.

　　中国政府十分重视劳动者的职业技能开发和职业培训工作，积极发展高级技工学校。目前，全国有技工学校4467所，每年招生70多万人。同时，充分利用社会力量培训各类人才，1996年共培训110多万人，其中培训军地两用人才1.8万人，就业前培训16.9万多人，培训乡镇企业人员4.5万多人。

      The Chinese government puts much emphasis on the development of workers' job skills and on job training, and vigorously promoted the development of senior secondary technical training schools. At present, there are 4,467 secondary technical training schools across the country, which admit more than 700,000 students each year. Meanwhile, social sectors have been fully mobilized to help train personnel in various fields. In 1996, more than 1.1 million people received training, including 18,000 ex-servicemen who were trained for civil jobs, 169,000 pre-employment trainees, and 45,000 township enterprises employees.

　　社会保险事业也不断发展，全国参加养老保险社会统筹的职工有8750万人，离退休人员有2250万人；建立了基本养老金正常调整机制，在全国范围内，连续两年按当地职工上一年平均工资增长率的40%至60%调整企业离退休人员的基本养老金，保障了企业离退休人员的基本生活。政府还颁布了《企业职工工伤保险试行办法》，使劳动者在生产过程中受到伤害后能得到应有的补偿。
   
      The social security work is making constant progress. More than 87.5 million workers and 22.5 million retirees have participated in pension insurance mutual assistance programs. Meanwhile, a mechanism for regular adjustment of basic pensions has been established nationwide, which has enabled the basic pension of enterprise retirees to grow for two consecutive years by 40 to 60 percent of the rate of the salary increase of local enterprise employees in the previous year, thus helping ensure the basic livelihood of enterprise retirees. The government has also promulgated the Provisional Measures on Insurance for Enterprise Employees Suffering from Industrial Injuries to ensure that workers get due compensation if hurt in the course of industrial production.

为使保障劳动者合法权益的各项法律法规得到真正的贯彻落实，政府加强了对用人单位遵守劳动法律法规的执法监察，开展了多种形式的劳动监察执法活动。
To guarantee the implementation of various laws and regulations that protect the legal rights and interests of workers, the government has increased supervision over enforcement of labor laws and regulations of work units by carrying out various forms of supervisory activities. 

据不完全统计，1996年上半年，各级劳动行政部门检查用人单位17.8万个，查处劳动违法案件76834件，并对违法者追究了相应的法律责任，维护了劳动者的合法权益。
According to statistics, labor administration departments at all levels reviewed 178,000 work units in the first half of 1996, and dealt with 76,834 cases involving the violation of labor laws and regulations. They also investigated and determined the legal liabilities of the violators, thereby protecting the legal rights and interests of the workers.

　　中国重视对老年人合法权益的保障，1996年8月通过了《中华人民共和国老年人权益保障法》，对老年人的家庭赡养与扶养、社会保障、参与社会发展以及侵害老年人合法权益行为的法律责任等作出了明确规定，使国家对老年人这一特殊群体的权益保护规范化、法律化。根据该法规定，国家建立养老保险制度，保障老年人的基本生活。老年人依法享有的养老金和其他待遇受到保障。国家根据经济发展、人民生活水平提高和职工工资增长的情况相应增加养老金。农村的老年人，无劳动能力、无生活来源、无赡养人和扶养人的，或者其赡养人和扶养人确无赡养能力或者扶养能力的，由农村集体经济组织负担保吃、保穿、保住、保医、保葬的五保供养。城市的老年人，无劳动能力、无生活来源、无赡养人和扶养人的，或者其赡养人和扶养人确无赡养能力或者扶养能力的，由当地人民政府给予救济。

      Attaching great importance to the protection of the legal rights and interests of the elderly, China passed the Law on Protection of the Rights and Interests of the Elderly in August 1996, which sets clear stipulations for family support and social security for the elderly, their participation in social development, and the legal liabilities of activities that infringe upon their legal rights and interests, standardizing and legalizing the state protection of this special social group. According to the law, the state has established a pension insurance system to ensure the basic livelihood of the elderly, and their pension and other treatment are protected by laws. The government increases the pension in line with economic development, improvement in people's living standards, and rise in workers' salaries; in rural areas, local economic organizations should provide adequate food and clothing, housing and medical service, and proper funeral arrangements for the elderly people who are unable to work, who have neither sources of income nor family support, or whose family supporters do not have the ability to support them. In urban areas, local governments should provide relief for elderly people who are unable to work, have neither sources of income nor family supporters, or whose family supporters are unable to support them.

公民的受教育权

 Citizens' Rights to Receive Education

近年来，中国公民的受教育水平不断提高。
Over the past few years, Chinese citizens' educational level has continued to rise. 

据统计，到1996年，全国共有小学64.6万所，在校学生13615万人，比1990年增长11.2%；普通中学8万所，在校学生5739.7万人，比1990年增长25.2%；普通高等学校1032所，在校学生302.1万人，比1990年增长46.5%；成人高等学校1138所，在校学生265.6万人，比1990年增长59.5%；各级各类中等职业学校1.86万所，在校学生1087.9万人，比1990年增长66.7%。
Statistics show that by 1996, there were 646,000 primary schools nationwide, with an enrollment of 136.15 million pupils, an increase of 11.2 percent over 1990; there were 80,000 middle schools with a total enrollment of 57.397 million, a jump of 25.2 percent over 1990; there were 1,032 universities and colleges, with a total of 3.021 million students, up 46.4 percent; universities and colleges for adults numbered 1,138, with the enrollment standing at 2.656 million, a leap of 59.5 percent; and the number of secondary vocational schools in various forms at various levels stood at 18,600, with 10.879 million students, an increase of 66.7 percent. 

可以说，中国已初步形成了一个能够基本保障公民受教育权利的教育体系。
We may say that China has established an educational system which can basically guarantee citizens' rights to receive an education.

中国有一套保障公民受教育权利的法律体系。
China has in place a set of legal systems to guarantee citizens' rights to get an education.

继1995年颁布《教育法》后，1996年5月又颁布了《中华人民共和国职业教育法》，规定公民有依法接受职业教育的权利，进一步完善了教育立法。在此基础上，政府采取各种措施，促进公民受教育权利的实现。据国家统计局统计，1995年全国6至14岁儿童未在学校学习的人数为1836万，比1990年人口普查时下降了1451万，6至14岁未在校学习的儿童数量占同龄人口的比例由1990年的18.62%下降到1995年的8.38%，下降了10个百分点。目前，中国已在90%以上的人口地区普及了小学教育，小学学龄儿童入学率为98.81%；升入初中的为92.62%。到1995年，中国文盲人数已降到1.45亿，成人文盲率下降为16.48%，青壮年文盲率下降为6.14%。1996年，全国又减少了400万青壮年文盲。
After the Education Law of the People's Republic of China was promulgated in 1995, the Law for Vocational Education of the People's Republic of China was promulgated in May of 1996, stipulating that citizens have the legal right to receive vocational education, thus further perfecting the legal educational system. Based on this, the government adopted various measures to ensure that the citizens enjoy their right to get an education. According to figures from the State Statistics Bureau, in 1995, there were 18.36 million children between the ages of six and 14 who did not study in schools, a decrease of 14.51 million compared with the number in 1990 when a census was taken. The rate of children in the 6-14 age group who did not study in schools dropped from 18.62 percent in 1990 to 8.38 percent in 1995, a decrease of 10 percentage points. Primary education is now universal in more than 90 percent of China's populated area, and the enrollment rate for children at primary school age is 98.81 percent. The rate of graduates of primary schools entering junior middle schools is 92.62 percent. By 1995, the number of illiterates had dropped to 145 million, and the rate of adult illiterates had dipped to 16.48 percent. The rate of young and adult illiterates had dropped to 6.14 percent. In 1996, an additional four million young and adult illiterates learned to read and write.

中国政府重视帮助经济困难的高校学生完成学业，采取了奖学金、贷学金、勤工助学基金、困难补助和学杂费减免等措施。
The Chinese government attaches great importance to the need to help university students with financial difficulties complete their study. It has adopted measures to aid these students through scholarships, loans, funding for part-time work and part-time study program, allowances and exemption or reduction of tuition fees. 

中央政府还拨出专款资助困难学生，1994年至1996年拨款达4.4亿多元。许多地区和部门也安排专项资金，资助困难学生。
The central government has allocated special funds to aid students with financial difficulties. From 1994 to 1996, the allocation reached more than 440 million yuan. Many regions and departments have earmarked special funds to aid these students.

　　为保障公民的受教育权利，提高全民族的科学文化素质，国家计划到2000年实现基本普及九年义务教育和基本扫除青壮年文盲。为此，中国政府积极采取措施，1996年又有26个省、自治区的457个县（市、区）基本达到了普及九年义务教育和基本扫除青壮年文盲的各项要求，覆盖人口1.9亿，占全国人口总数的16.4%。至此，全国累计已有1482个县(市、区）达到要求，人口覆盖率达50%。

      To guarantee citizens' rights to receive education and improve the scientific and cultural quality of the nation as a whole, the country has planned to make the nine-year compulsory education universal and basically wipe out illiteracy among the young and adults by the year 2000. To do so, the Chinese government has actively adopted a number of measures. In 1996, an additional 457 counties, cities and districts in 26 provinces and autonomous regions, having a population of 190 million, or 16.4 percent of the population of the whole country, met the demand to make the nine years of compulsory education universal and basically wipe out illiteracy among the young and adults. So far, an accumulative total of 1,482 counties, cities and districts, covering 50 percent of the population of the whole nation, have reached the goals.

　　自1983年以来，中国政府相继设立老、少、边、穷地区普及义务教育、职业教育、师范教育、民族教育四项政府教育补助专款，加上政府掌握的城市教育费附加，每年资金达3亿元，主要用于扶持贫困地区教育事业的发展。政府还决定从1995年到2000年由中央财政投入39亿元专款，加上地方各级财政配套拨款，资金投入总量预计100亿元，重点投向《国家八七扶贫攻坚计划》中确定的贫困县，部分投向经济确有困难、基础教育发展薄弱的省定贫困县，优先投向少数民族地区。此外，已经实施多年的“希望工程”1996年又取得新的进展。据统计，1996年全国“希望工程”共接受捐款2.86亿元，援建希望小学1560所，资助失学儿童29万余名。至此，“希望工程”七年来已累计接受捐款9.78亿元，援建希望小学3634所，资助失学儿童154.9万名。

      Since 1983, the Chinese government has established, in succession, four special government subsidy funds to make compulsory education universal in old revolutionary base areas, areas inhabited by minority ethnic groups, remote areas and poor areas, and to support vocational education, teacher-training and the education of national minorities. In addition to the government-controlled added city education fund, which is some 300 million yuan each year, the funding has been mainly used to support the development of education in poor regions. The government has decided to allocate a special fund of 3.9 billion yuan from the central budget between 1995 and 2000 to focus on poor counties recognized by the "National Plan for Poverty Relief". Also, supplementary government allocations will come from local budgets at various levels. An estimated 10 billion yuan in total will be poured into the program. The fund will be mainly given to poor counties recognized by the Plan and part of the money will go to provincially recognized counties with economic difficulties and poor development of primary education. The priority will be given to ethnic minority regions in using the fund. Moreover, the "Hope Project" which has been enforced for many years, showed marked new progress in 1996. Statistics show that the project received nationwide donations totalling 286 million yuan in 1996, which helped build 1,560 "Hope" primary schools and aided 290,000 dropouts. Over the past seven years, the "Hope Project" has received an accumulative total of 978 million yuan of donations, which has been used to build 3,634 "Hope" schools and aided 1.549 million dropouts.

　　中国政府大力发展残疾人教育。到1996年底，全国已建特殊义务教育学校1426所，在校的盲、聋、弱智学生32.11万人。特殊教育学校和在校残疾学生人数分别比1990年增长91.15%和345.97%。

      The Chinese government has made great efforts to develop education for the disabled. By the end of 1996, the country had built 1,426 compulsory special education schools, with an enrollment of some 321, 100 blind, deaf and retarded students. The number of such schools and the number of disabled students increased by 91.15 percent and 345.97 percent over the 1990 figures respectively.

妇女、儿童的合法权益

 Legitimate Rights and Interests of Women and Children

    中国为促进男女平等、保障妇女合法权益，作出了积极的努力。
China has made active endeavors in promoting equality between men and women and safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of women. 

妇女依法在国家政治生活中享有与男子平等的权利。
Women enjoy equal rights with men in state political life in accordance with the law. 
到1996年底，在机关、企事业等单位工作的女干部已达1328万人，占干部总数的33.8%，是建国初期的200多倍。在第八届全国人大代表中，有女代表626名，占代表总数的21.03%。政府各部门中女性担任领导职务的人数也有所增加。全国女副省长的人数已由1994年的18人增至1996年的21人，女正、副市长由174人增至225人，女正、副县长由1329人增至1540人。
By the end of 1996, the number of women cadres in government departments, enterprises and institutions had climbed to 13.28 million, making up 33.8 percent of the total number of cadres in China. The number was over 200 times that of women cadres in the early period after the founding of New China. There are 626 women delegates to the Eighth National People's Congress, accounting for 21.03 percent of the total. The number of women holding leading posts at the various government departments has also increased. The number of female vice provincial governors increased from 18 in 1994 to 21 in 1996, that of women mayors and vice mayors grew from 174 to 225, and female county magistrates and vice magistrates from 1,329 to 1,540.

妇女的经济、社会、文化权利得到保障。
The economic, social and cultural rights of women have also been guaranteed. 

1995年，妇女从业人员已占社会从业人员总数的44%左右，高于世界平均34.5%的比例；城镇女职工由1994年的5465万人增至5755万人，占职工总数的38.6%；女科技人员由1993年的809.7万人增至988.1万人，占科技人员总数的36.91%。中国实行男女同工同酬。妇女劳动受到特殊保护，在经期、孕期、产期和哺乳期受到特殊照顾，职工中的生育妇女享有三个月的带薪产假。
In 1995, female employees made up about 44 percent of the total employed people in China, higher than the world average rate of 34.5 percent. The number of women workers in cities and towns increased from 54.65 million in 1994 to 57.55 million in 1995, accounting for 38.6 percent of the total workforce in the country's cities and towns. The number of women scientists and technicians jumped from 8.097 million in 1993 to 9.881 million in 1995, making up 36.91 percent of the total. China implements the principle of men and women enjoying equal pay for equal work. Women's work is under special protection: women enjoy special care during the menstrual period, pregnancy, maternity leave and breast-feeding, and women workers who give birth can take a three-month leave of absence with pay.

妇女受教育的权利得到进一步保障。
Women's rights to receive education have further been protected. 

建国四十多年来，全国已累计扫除女文盲1.1亿，使妇女文盲比例由1949年的90%降到1995年的32%。1996年，全国女童入学率已由1990年的80%提高到98.63%，女童与男童入学率之差已由1991年的2.9%下降到1996年的0.35%。中学生、大学生中的女生比例分别由1990年的42.2%、33.7%上升到45.5%、36.4%。到1995年，全国已建立1679所女子中等职业学校和3所女子职业大学，开设了60多个适合妇女的专业，有1300多万妇女在成人学校学习。
In the four decades and more since the founding of New China, the country has helped 110 million illiterate women learn how to read and write, cutting down the ratio of illiterate women from 90 percent in 1949 to 32 percent in 1995. In 1996, the ratio of school attendance for girls across China soared to 98.63 percent from 80 percent in 1990. The gap in the ratio of school attendance between girls and boys decreased from 2.9 percent in 1991 to 0.35 percent in 1996. The ratio of female students in middle schools and colleges and universities increased from 42.2 percent and 33.7 percent respectively in 1990 to 45.5 percent and 36.4 percent in 1996. By 1995, China had built 1,679 women's secondary vocational schools and three women's vocational universities and opened 60 specialities suitable for women. More than 13 million women had been enrolled by adult schools across the country.
 
妇女的健康状况有较大改善。城乡普遍建立了妇幼卫生保健服务网络。
Women's health conditions have improved considerably. Health care networks for women and children have been built in both urban and rural areas.

1995年，全国有妇幼保健院349所，妇幼保健站2832所，妇产医院49所，儿童医院35所；孕产妇死亡率由1993年的67.3/10万下降到61.9/10万；妇女的平均预期寿命已由1949年的36岁提高到72岁，比男性高3岁，比联合国提出的到2000年世界妇女平均预期寿命65岁的目标高出7岁。
By 1995, China had built 349 hospitals and 2,832 clinics for women's and children's health care, 49 obstetrics and gynecology hospitals and 35 children's hospitals. The mortality rate of pregnant women and women in labor was reduced from 67.3 per 100,000 in 1993 to 61.9 per 100,000 in 1995. The average life expectancy of women climbed from 36 years in 1949 to 72 years in 1995, three years longer than average life expectancy for men in China, and seven years longer than the average life expectancy of 65 years for women set by the United Nations for the year 2000.
    中国重视对儿童权益的保护，目前已形成了以《未成年人保护法》为主体的较为完善的保护儿童权益的法律体系。自1992年2月中国颁布《九十年代中国儿童发展规划纲要》后，全国30个省、自治区、直辖市以及80%的地（市）、半数以上的县（区），陆续制定了本地区的儿童发展规划。为切实保障儿童的健康成长，中国的立法、司法、政府各有关部门以及社会团体都建立了相应的机构，负责协调和推动政府有关部门做好维护妇女儿童权益的工作。国务院设有妇女儿童工作委员会，全国30个省、自治区、直辖市都建立了妇女儿童工作委员会或未成年人保护委员会，大部分地（市）、县（区）也都设立了妇女儿童工作委员会。

      China attaches importance to protecting the interests and rights of children. It has built a relatively complete legal system for protecting children's rights and interests, with the Law on Protection of Minors as the mainstay. Since the Outline on Development for Chinese Children in the 1990s was promulgated in February 1992, 30 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities as well as 80 percent of the prefectures and cities and more than 50 percent of the counties and districts in China have worked out their own development plans for children. To effectively guarantee the healthy growth of children, the legislative, judicial and relevant government departments and social organizations in China have built institutions which take charge of coordinating and promoting government departments concerned to do a good job in safeguarding the interests and rights of women and children. The State Council has set up the Women and Children Work Committee. Thirty provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities have also set up committees to work for women and children or committees for the protection of children and adolescents. The majority of prefectures, cities, counties and districts have also established women and children work committees.

　　中国儿童的发展状况明显改善，现已达到国家规划的九十年代儿童发展的中期目标。自1991年以来，中国开展了大规模的爱婴行动，至1995年底已创建2957所爱婴医院。中国婴儿死亡率和5岁以下儿童死亡率连年下降，1995年分别降至36.4‰、44.5‰，1991年至1995年平均下降速度分别为7.7%、7.6%。据1995年多指标住户调查，按国际通用的评价标准，中国5岁以下儿童中、重度营养不良的比例为15.80%，比1990年的20.74%下降了23.83%。中国从1978年开始普及儿童计划免疫，1995年，卡介苗、百白破、脊灰和麻疹四苗报告接种率分别达到92.3%、92.1%、93.8%和92.9%。

      The conditions for Chinese children's development have been remarkably improved and the mid-term goals for children's development in the 1990s set by the State have been attained. Since 1991, China has been conducting a large-scale baby-friendly campaign. By the end of 1995, China had built 2,957 baby-friendly hospitals. The mortality rates of infants and children under five have declined year by year, dropping to 36.4 per thousand and 44.5 per thousand, respectively, in 1995. During the 1991-95 period, the mortality rates of infants and children under five dropped annually by 7.7 percent and 7.6 percent, respectively, on average. According to a multi-index household survey in 1995, the rate of malnutrition in the moderate and worst degrees, judging by the internationally accepted standards, among children under five in China was 15.8 percent, 23.83 percent lower than the 1990 rate of 20.74 percent. China started a universal immunity program for children in 1978. Reports show that in 1995, 92.3 percent of the children in China were vaccinated, 92.1 percent were inoculated against diphtheria, whooping cough and tetanus, 93.8 percent against polio and 92.9 percent had measles shots.

　　中国政府一直高度重视残疾儿童的康复工作，到1995年，已在全国的大中城市建立残疾儿童康复站（点）2000多个。截至1995年底，已完成聋儿听力语言训练6万多名；训练智残儿童10万名，提高了他们的生活自理能力和认知能力；为3万名低视力儿童配戴助视器，使他们提高了视力；还对儿童期的儿麻后遗症患者、先天性白内障患者进行了康复治疗，1991年至1995年共帮助20多万残疾儿童恢复健康。

      The Chinese government attaches great importance to the convalescence needs of disabled children. By 1995, over 2,000 convalescence centers for disabled children had been set up in large and medium-sized cities throughout the country. By the end of 1995, more than 60,000 deaf children had received training in hearing and speech courses, and 100,000 mentally-handicapped children had improved their abilities to care for themselves and to learn through training. Over 30,000 children with poor sight had received eyesight-aiding devices to improve their vision. Children who suffered from sequelae of infantile paralysis and congenital cataracts have received medical treatment with more than 200,000 disabled children restored to health in the 1991-95 period.

中国社会福利事业机构主要收养失去双亲又无法定义务抚养人的孤儿。
China's social welfare institutions mainly take in orphans who have lost their parents and have no legal guardians. 

1990年至1994年，为了给孤儿提供生活、医疗、康复保障，地方财政用于福利院孤儿的养育费为5.15亿元，国家专门用于改善福利院孤儿生存条件的资金7.4亿元。近几年，许多儿童福利院还通过募集资金，为福利院的残疾儿童实施脱残手术。1995年全国开展“残疾儿童康复工程”，号召全国三级以上医院为福利院残疾孤儿实施医疗康复手术，使200多名福利院残疾儿童脱残。
To provide guarantee for the orphans in living and medical care and convalescence, local governments funded welfare institutions with a total of 515 million yuan between 1990 and 1994. During the same period, the central government allocated 740 million yuan of special funds for improving the living conditions of children in welfare institutions. In recent years, many children's welfare institutions have raised funds to have restorative operations for disabled children in welfare institutions. In 1995, the country launched a nationwide project for the convalescence of disabled children, urging hospitals above grade three to operate on disabled children living in welfare institutions. As a result, over 200 disabled children in welfare institutions were restored to health.    

中国政府大力发展妇幼保健事业，提高托儿所、幼儿园的卫生保障和教育水平。
The Chinese government devotes energetic efforts to developing health care undertakings for women and children and raising the health care and educational levels of nurseries and kindergartens. 
目前，全国共有幼儿园18.73万所，大中城市儿童的入园要求基本得到满足。
At present, there are a total of 187,300 kindergartens throughout the country. The demand for kindergartens in large and medium-sized cities has been basically satisfied.

少数民族的权利保障

 Guarantee of the Rights of Ethnic Minorities

    在中国，各民族一律平等，国家保障各少数民族的合法权利和利益，维护和发展各民族的平等、团结和互助关系。各少数民族聚居的地方，实行民族区域自治制度。各自治区主席、自治州州长、自治县县长，都由实行区域自治的民族的公民担任；自治地方人民政府的其他组成人员，都尽量配备实行区域自治的民族和其他少数民族的人员。民族自治地方的各民族都有使用和发展自己的语言文字的自由，有保持或者改革自己的风俗习惯的自由，并依法享有宗教信仰自由。

      In China, all ethnic groups are equal and the state guarantees the legal rights and interests of all ethnic minorities, safeguards and promotes the relationship of equality, unity and mutual assistance among all ethnic groups. A national minorities regional autonomy system is practiced in places where ethnic minorities gather and live. Minority nationals take the posts of chairmen of the autonomous regions, commissioners of the autonomous prefectures and the autonomous counties magistrates. As many as possible of the other leading posts in the autonomous governments are also taken by the nationals or other minorities. The ethnic minorities in the autonomous areas are entitled to use and develop their own languages, keep or reform their folk customs, and be free in their religious beliefs.

　　国家对少数民族聚居地区的经济发展继续实行扶助政策，提供资金、技术、人才等方面的支援，促进了少数民族聚居地区经济的快速发展和生活水平的提高。1996年，内蒙古、西藏、新疆、广西、宁夏这五大自治区的总体发展速度明显高出全国水平，国内生产总值增幅超过10%；城乡居民收入大幅度增加，农民人均收入增幅超过全国平均水平。内蒙古自治区国民生产总值983亿元，比上年增长12.4%；农牧民人均收入1602元，实际增长14.8%；城镇居民人均生活费收入达到3101元。西藏自治区国民生产总值达到64.53亿元，比1995年增长10%；全区城镇居民人均生活费收入5036元，增长25.9%；农民人均纯收入达到960元，增长9.3%。新疆维吾尔自治区1996年国民生产总值979亿元，比上年增长9%左右；农牧民人均纯收入1300元，增长14.4%；城镇居民人均生活费收入4250元，增长10.6%；全区城乡居民储蓄存款余额575.79亿元，增长20.8%。

      The state continues its assistance policy toward the economic growth in ethnic minority areas, by providing funding, technology and personnel to accelerate these regions' economic progress and to upgrade the people's living standard. In 1996, the overall growth rate of the five autonomous regions of Inner Mongolia, Tibet, Xinjiang, Guangxi and Ningxia was noticeably higher than the country's average, with the GDP rising by over ten percent and the income of the regions' urban and rural residents rising markedly. The regions' per capita income of the farmers was also increasing at a far quicker pace than the country's average. Inner Mongolia's GNP reached 98.3 billion yuan in 1996, a 12.4 percent increase over 1995. The per capita income of the region's farmers and herdsmen was 1,602 yuan, a practical increase of 14.8 percent, while the urban per capita income was 3,101 yuan. Last year, Tibet's GNP was registered at 6.453 billion yuan, ten percent higher than in 1995. The per capita income of the region's urban dwellers was 5,036 yuan, 25.9 percent higher than 1995, while the rural people's per capita income reached 960 yuan, an increase of 9.3 percent. The 1996 GNP for Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region was 97.9 billion yuan, an increase of nine percent over the previous year. The urban dwellers' per capita income was 4,250 yuan, an increase of 10.6 percent, while the farmers' and herdsmen's per capita income was 1,300 yuan, a rise of 14.4 percent. The savings deposits of the region's urban and rural residents reached 57.579 billion yuan, an increase of 20.8 percent.

　　1996年3月，中国通过了《国民经济和社会发展“九五”计划和2010年远景目标纲要》，决定采取措施加速少数民族人口比较集中的中西部地区的发展。这些措施包括：优先在中西部地区安排资源开发和基础设施建设项目；调整加工工业的地区布局，引导资源加工型和劳动密集型产业向中西部地区转移；理顺资源性产品价格，增强中西部地区自我发展的能力；逐步增加对中西部地区的财政支持；加快中西部地区改革开放的步伐；提高国家政策性贷款用于中西部地区的比重；继续组织中央各部门、社会各界和东部沿海地区，以多种形式支援西藏等少数民族地区。1996年，民族地区一大批重点工程竣工或开工，如广西壮族自治区桂林两江国际机场竣工开通；5月，投资30多亿、能解决100万回族聚居区贫困人口温饱问题的“宁夏扶贫扬黄灌溉工程”开工；9月，新疆维吾尔自治区南疆铁路西段建设拉开序幕。国家对西藏的发展继续给予特别照顾。1996年，国家对1994年确定的62个援藏工程项目增加投资14亿元，新增加援藏项目151个，总投资4.9亿元。中央有关部委和兄弟省市还派出150多个工作组进藏考察，制定了十年援藏规划。目前，全国援藏62项工程已交付使用56项，到位资金35.3亿元，改善了西藏的交通、能源、通信等基础设施落后的状况，使当地100多万人直接受益。

      The Ninth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development and the Outline for the Long-Range Objectives Through the Year 2010, passed in March 1996, decided to accelerate the development in the central and western parts of China, which are home to most of the country's minority population. Measures in these plans include: giving priority to arrangement of the resource exploration and infrastructure projects in the central and western regions; readjusting the locations of processing industries, and shifting the resource processing and labor-intensive industries to the central and western regions; readjusting the prices for products of a resource nature and enhancing the self-development capability of the central and western regions; gradually increasing the financial support to the central and western regions; accelerating the reform pace of the central and west; increasing the ratio of the country's policy-oriented loans in the central and western regions; continuing to organize various departments of the central government, all walks of life and the eastern coastal areas to provide more assistance in various forms to aid Tibet and other minority areas. In 1996, numerous key projects were completed or launched in minority areas. For instance, the Liangjiang international airport in Guilin, a major city in Guangxi, has been completed and put into operation. Work on a three-billion-yuan irrigation project was started last May in Ningxia which aims to give one million poverty-stricken people of the Hui ethnic group enough food and clothing, while construction started last September on the western section of the Southern Xinjiang Railway line. The state has continued to give Tibet special assistance. In 1996, the 62 aid-Tibet projects designated by the state in 1994 were given another 1.4 billion yuan in funding. The state also added 151 more relief projects for Tibet, involving a total investment of 490 million yuan. Ministries and commissions of the central government and some provinces and cities sent more than 150 work teams to Tibet on investigative missions and worked out a 10-year assistance plan for the region. At present, 56 out of the 62 assistance projects have been completed and put into operation, involving 3.53 billion yuan. This has improved the backwardness of transportation, energy, telecommunications and other infrastructure facilities in Tibet and directly benefitted the more than one million people there.

中国政府历来关心少数民族地区教育文化事业的发展，尊重和重视维护少数民族的传统文化。
The Chinese government has, as always, paid great attention on the educational and cultural development of the ethnic minority areas, and respected and safeguarded the traditional culture of the minorities. 

1996年，西藏自治区加大了教育投入，新建和改扩建中小学87所，适龄儿童入学率达到73.5%，比1995年增长3.1个百分点。广西壮族自治区适龄儿童入学率达到98.16%，在校小学生达639.5万人。1996年，世界上海拔最高的现代化的、多功能的大型图书馆西藏自治区图书馆建成开馆。中国三大史诗之一、素有“国宝”之称的柯尔克孜族英雄史诗《玛纳斯》汉译基本完成。
Last year, Tibet focused more of its investment on its education programs, and set up or renovated 87 primary and middle schools, with the school enrollment rate reaching 73.5 percent for school-age children, 3.1 percent"iage points higher than that of 1995. In 1996, 98.16 percent of the school-age children in Guangxi entered school, bringing the total number of the region's primary school pupils to 6.395 million. Also last year, the large, modern and multi-functional Tibet Autonomous Region Library, the world's highest in altitude, was completed and opened to the public. The translation into Chinese of the Manass, one of China's three great epics and an epic of the Kirgiz people in Xinjiang long known as a "national treasure" was nearly completed.

　　1996年中国人权事业的进展再一次证明，中国将人民的生存权和发展权置于首位，在改革、发展、稳定的条件下，加强民主法制建设，全面推进人权，是符合中国国情和全体人民的根本利益的，在实践中是卓有成效的。

      The progress China made in its human rights undertakings in 1996 has once again proved that China always places top priority on its people's right to subsistence and development. Under the conditions of reform, development and stability, strengthening the democratic and legal systems and giving human rights a comprehensive push are in line with the Chinese circumstances and in the fundamental interests of the Chinese people. This has turned out to be a great success in practice.

　　人权状况的改善是一个随着社会政治、经济、文化的发展而不断发展的过程。中国是一个发展中国家，受历史和现实条件的限制，人权状况还存在着一些不如人意的地方。中国政府和人民将继续努力，使人民享受的人权在更广阔的领域和更高的层次上不断得到实现。

      The improvement of human rights is a continuously developing process along with the political, economic and cultural progress. China, as a developing country, is restricted by its historical and realistic conditions, and the country's human rights conditions still have room for further improvement. The Chinese government and people will continue to try every means possible to help the people enjoy human rights in a broader space and at a higher level.
中国的儿童状况
The Situation of Children in China
中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China
一九九六年四月·北京
April 1996, Beijing

目　录 
Contents   
前言
Foreword  
儿童权益的保障 
Guarantee of Children's Rights and Interests
儿童的健康与保健 
Children's Health and Care
儿童的教育
Education for Children  
残疾儿童的保护
Protection of Disabled Children 
儿童福利院
China's Welfare Homes for Children
附录 
Appendix


前 言
Foreword
　　中国是一个发展中国家，有12亿多人口，其中16岁以下儿童有3亿多，约占世界儿童总数的五分之一。
China is a developing country with a population of over 1.2 billion, of whom over 300 million are children under the age of 16, making up about one fifth of the total number of children in the world.
　　如何看待中国儿童今天的状况呢？联合国《世界儿童状况1996》曾公布过的一组数字，已反映了几个方面的具体情况：
What is the situation of Chinese children today? The 1996 State of the World's Children Report of the United Nations issued a group of figures, which reflect concrete conditions in the following aspects: 

关于儿童的基本指标，1994年5岁以下儿童的死亡率，发展中国家平均为101‰，东亚和太平洋地区平均为56‰，中国为43‰。
The basic indexes on children. In 1994, the mortality rate of children under five in developing countries was 101 per thousand; that in East Asia and the Pacific region, 56 per thousand; and in China, 43 per thousand.

关于儿童的营养状况，1980年到1994年，低体重（中重度）儿童的比例，发展中国家平均为35%，东亚和太平洋地区平均为23%，中国为17%。
Children's nutrition. Between 1980 and 1994, children with low weight in developing countries made up 35 percent on average, 23 percent in East Asia and the Pacific region, and 17 percent in China.

关于儿童的卫生状况，1994年1岁儿童卡介苗、百白破、小儿麻痹和麻疹的免疫所占的百分比，发展中国家平均分别为87%、80%、80%和78%，东亚和太平洋地区平均分别为94%、91%、92%和89%，中国分别为94%、93%、94%和89%。
Health care for children. In 1994, in developing countries, one-year-old children who were immune to the BCG vaccine totaled 87 percent; those immune to pertussis, diphthe"iria and tetanus, 80 percent; to infantile paralysis, 80 percent; and to measles, 78 percent. The immunity percentages for East Asia and the Pacific region were respectively 94 percent, 91 percent, 92 percent and 89 percent; and those for China, 94 percent, 93 percent, 94 percent and 89 percent.

关于儿童的教育状况，1986年至1993年，发展中国家的小学净入学率男女平均分别为87%和80%，东亚和太平洋地区平均分别为99%和94%，中国分别为99%和94%。
Children's education. Between 1986 and 1993, the net attendance rate of schoolage boys of primary schools in developing countries averaged 87 percent, and that of girls, 80 percent. This compares to, respectively, 99 percent and 94 percent in East Asia and the Pacific region, and 99 percent and 94 percent in China.

为使世人更为全面地了解中国的儿童状况，了解中国政府和全社会保护儿童生存和发展的状况，以及中国作为发展中国家在儿童的发展方面还存在什么尚待解决的困难和问题，现将有关情况公之于世。
To help the world toward a more comprehensive understanding of the situation of Chinese children, of how the Chinese Government and the whole society protect children's survival and development, and of the difficulties and problems on the development of children that remain to be resolved in a developing country like China, we now reveal to the public a range of relevant information about the condition of children in China. 

儿童权益的保障
Guarantee of Children's Rights and Interests 

儿童是人类的未来和希望，今天的儿童是二十一世纪的主人。
Children are the future and hope of mankind. Today's children will be masters of the 21st century. 

儿童的生存、保护和发展是提高人口素质的基础，是人类发展的先决条件，直接关系到一个国家和民族的前途与命运。
Children's survival, protection and development, which are the basis for improving the quality of the population and the prerequisite conditions for the advance of mankind, directly concern a country and a nation's future and destiny. 

中华民族素有“携幼”、“爱幼”的传统美德，中国古语“幼吾幼以及人之幼”流传至今。中国政府一向以认真和负责的态度，高度关心和重视儿童的生存、保护和发展，把“提高全民族素质，从儿童抓起”作为社会主义现代化建设的根本大计，在全社会倡导树立“爱护儿童、教育儿童、为儿童做表率、为儿童办实事”的公民意识，并努力为儿童事业的发展创造良好的社会条件。中国实行改革开放政策以来，儿童工作进一步走上社会化、科学化、法制化的轨道，儿童工作成为国家建设和全社会义务的重要组成部分。
The Chinese nation has long cultivated the traditional virtues of ``bringing along the young'' and ``loving the young.'' An old saying, ``Love our own and others' children,'' is still very popular. The Chinese Government, with an earnest and responsible attitude, always shows great concern for children's survival, protection and development. It regards ``the education of children to improve the quality of the whole people'' as a fundamental policy for its socialist modernization program. The government educates society at large to ``protect and educate children, and set an example and do practical things for children.'' It spares no effort to create favorable social conditions for the progress of children's programs. Since the initiation of reform and opening to the outside world, children's programs in China have moved into social, scientific and legal tracks; and children's programs have become an important component part of the nation's construction and the duties of the whole society.

面向二十一世纪的儿童工作纲领
Children's Programs for the 21st Century 

1992年2月16日，中国政府正式颁布了《九十年代中国儿童发展规划纲要》。《纲要》的制定，充分显示了中国政府重视和关怀儿童事业严肃、负责的态度。《纲要》根据中国国民经济和社会发展十年规划和第八个五年计划（1991—1995）提出的任务和总目标，依据世界儿童问题首脑会议通过的两个文件精神，结合中国儿童工作的实际情况，以面向世界、面向未来、面向现代化的姿态，提出了到2000年将1990年的婴儿死亡率和5岁以下儿童死亡率分别降低三分之一、使1990年5岁以下儿童中度和重度营养不良患病率降低一半等10项主要奋斗目标和实现这些目标的策略和措施。中国30个省、自治区、直辖市都依据《纲要》，结合本地区的实际制定了儿童发展规划，全国范围内实现《纲要》的措施和工作是扎实而有效的。
On February 16, 1992, the Chinese Government formally promulgated the Outline of the Program for Chinese Children's Development in the 1990s. The formulation of this program fully displays the Chinese Government's earnest and responsible attitude toward, and its concern for, the work impacting children. In accordance with the tasks and general objectives proposed by the Ten-Year Program for China's National Economic and Social Development and the Eighth Five-Year Plan (1991-95), the spirit of the two documents adopted by the Summit Conference on the Issue of World Children, as well as China's actual children's programs, the Outline, having the world, the future and China's modernization program in view, puts forward ten main objectives and tactics and measures for realizing these objectives. It states that the mortality rate of infants and that of children under five in 1990 will both be reduced by one third, and that disease occurrence in children under five caused by moderate and severe malnutrition will drop by 50 percent in 2000. All of the 30 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the central government in China have worked out development programs for children in light of the Outline and their respective local conditions. The measures and work for implementing the Outline are carried out in a down-to-earth and effective way throughout the country.
　　立法保护
Protection Through Legislation 
　　中国多年来致力于通过立法来保护儿童的合法利益，进而使儿童权益的保护法制化、规范化。
For many years, China has striven to protect children's legitimate rights and interests through legislation, endeavoring to place such protection on a legal and normal footing.
　　中国从国情出发，参照世界各国立法，特别是有关保护儿童权益的法律和国际文件，制定了以《中华人民共和国宪法》为核心，包括《刑法》、《民法通则》、《婚姻法》、《教育法》、《义务教育法》、《残疾人保障法》、《未成年人保护法》、《妇女权益保障法》、《母婴保健法》、《传染病防治法》和《收养法》等在内的一系列有关儿童生存、保护和发展的法律，以及大量相应的法规和政策措施，形成了较为完备的保护儿童权益的法律体系。中国宪法明确规定：“国家培养青年、少年、儿童在品德、智力、体质等方面全面发展”，“儿童受国家的保护”，“禁止虐待儿童”。根据中国宪法，中国的有关法律对儿童的生命权、生存与发展、基本健康和保健、家庭环境和替代性照料、教育、休闲和文化活动以及残疾儿童的特殊保护等均有全面系统的规定，并规定对虐待、遗弃、故意杀害儿童以及偷盗、拐卖、绑架、出卖、收买儿童等犯罪行为，予以严厉惩处。在中国的宪法、法律和有关行政法规中，还对保护儿童权益的政府职能、社会参与、工作原则以及相应的法律责任有比较完整的规范，从中可以清楚地看出中国为保护儿童权益制定的法律框架和社会保障机制是行之有效的。
In accordance with the actual conditions in China and by reference to relative legislation in other countries, especially to the laws and international documents on the protection of children's rights and interests, China has worked out a series of laws concerning children's survival, protection and development. With the Constitution of the People's Republic of China as the core, these provisions include the Criminal Law, the General Principles of Civil Law, the Marriage Law, the Education Law, the Compulsory Education Law, the Law on the Protection of Disabled Persons, the Law on the Protection of Juveniles, the Law on the Protection of Women's Rights and Interests, the Law on Health Protection of Mothers and Infants, the Law on the Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases, and the Law on Adoption, in addition to a great number of other relevant regulations and measures. Hence a fairly complete legal system for the protection of children's rights and interests has been formed.The Constitution of China clearly specifies: ``The state promotes the all-round moral, intellectual and physical development of children and young people,'' ``... child are protected by the state,'' and ``maltreatment of ... children is prohibited.'' Formulated according to the Constitution, China's relevant laws include comprehensive and systematic provisions on children's right to life, survival and development, as well as basic health and health care. Provisions also address children's family environment and substitutional care, education, free time and cultural activities and the special protection of disabled children. It is specified that criminal acts, such as maltreating, abandoning and deliberately killing children, as well as stealing, abducting and trafficking, kidnaping, selling and buying in children, should be severely punished. In addition, China's Constitution, laws and relevant administrative legislation also include comparatively complete provisions on the government's functions, the society's participation, work principles and corresponding legal responsibilities in the protection of children's rights and interests. From these it can be clearly seen that China's legal framework for the protection of children's rights and interests and its social guarantee mechanisms are effective in practice. 
　　司法保护
Judicial Protection 

中国在司法程序中十分重视保护未成年人的合法权益，许多重要的法律对此都有特殊规定。
China's judicial procedure attaches great importance to the protection of juveniles' legal rights and interests, on which there are many important laws containing special provisions. 

中国对违法犯罪的未成年人，实行教育、感化、挽救的方针，并坚持教育为主、惩罚为辅的原则。公安机关、人民检察院、人民法院在办理未成年人犯罪的案件时，充分考虑未成年人的身心特点，尊重违法犯罪的未成年人的人格尊严，保障他们的合法权益。中国的公安机关、人民检察院、人民法院和司法行政机关对审前羁押的未成年人，采取与羁押的成年人分别看管的办法，对经人民法院判决服刑的未成年人，也采取与服刑的成年人分别关押、管理的办法。中国法院对14周岁以上不满16周岁的未成年人犯罪案件，一律不公开审理。对16周岁以上不满18周岁的未成年人犯罪案件，一般也不公开审理。对未成年人犯罪案件，在判决前，新闻报道、影视节目、公开出版物不得披露该未成年人的姓名、住所、照片及可能推断出该未成年人的资料。
To the juveniles who break the law and commit crimes, China adopts the policy of education, help and reform and adheres to the principle of relying mainly on education while making punishment subsidiary. While handling criminal cases concerning juve"iniles, public security organs, people's procuratorates and people's courts take full consideration of juveniles' physical and mental characteristics, respect their personality and dignity, and safeguard their legal rights and interests. Before criminals are tried, public security organs, people's procuratorates, people's courts and judicial administrative organs detain juveniles separately from adults; and juveniles who serve a sentence decided by the people's court are separately imprisoned from adult criminals and are treated differently. All criminal cases of persons aged 14 and 15 are not tried publicly by the people's court; and in general, criminal cases of persons aged 16 and 17 are not tried publicly. Before a criminal case of a teenager is judged, it is stipulated that the press, films, TV programs and public publications should not reveal the teenager's name, home address, photo and other identifying data.
　　组织保障
Organizational Guarantee 
　　为了切实保护儿童权益，中国的立法、司法、政府各有关部门以及社会团体都建立了相应的机制，以监督、实施和促进保护儿童事业的健康发展。
To truly protect children's rights and interests, China's legislation, judicial and government departments concerned as well as mass organizations have set up corresponding mechanisms to supervise, effect and propel the healthy development of the work impacting children's protection.
　　作为中国最高国家权力机关的全国人民代表大会，其内务司法委员会负责妇女儿童权益保障的立法和执法监督检查，委员会内设立了妇女、儿童专门小组，配有专职人员。中国人民政治协商会议设有社会与法制委员会，其职责之一是监督和促进国家有关妇女、青年、儿童等方面的法律、法规的实施，并就这方面的问题和情况向国家的立法、行政部门提出建议。
As the highest organ of state power in China, the National People's Congress (NPC) has a Committee for Internal and Judicial Affairs responsible for legislation for the protection of women and children's rights and interests and for the supervision and check-up of law enforcement. This committee has a special group for women and children staed with full-time working personnel. The Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) has a Subcommittee on Social and Legislative Aairs, one of whose responsibilities is to supervise and promote the implementation of the state's laws and regulations on women, youth and children and raise proposals on work in this regard to the state's legislation and administrative departments.
　　中国国务院成立了妇女儿童工作委员会，该委员会由有关的政府职能部门和社会团体的负责人组成，由政府一名国务委员担任主任。该委员会负责协调和推动政府有关部门实施《九十年代中国儿童发展规划纲要》；协调和推动政府有关部门为妇女儿童办实事。中央和地方政府的各有关部门，如教育、卫生、文化、公安、体育、民政等部门，也设立了负责儿童工作的职能机构。各省、自治区、直辖市组建了妇女儿童工作委员会或未成年人保护委员会，组织并指导当地的儿童权益保护工作的开展。一些群众性团体和组织也承担了大量的保障儿童事业发展的任务。
The State Council of China has set up the Work Committee for Women and Children, which consists of responsible persons from the concerned government departments and mass organizations, and a state councilor who serves as chairperson. This committee has as its tasks to coordinate and promote the governmental departments concerned with implementing the Outline of the Program for Chinese Children's Development in the 1990s; and harmonize and propel these departments to do practical things for women and children. Both the central and local government departments involving education, pub"ilic health, culture, public security, physical culture and civil administration have set up functional organs to take charge of the work for children. The provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities have set up committees on women and children's aairs or juvenile protection committees to organize and guide the work of protecting local children's rights and interests. Some mass organizations also perform many tasks to guarantee the development of the work concerning children in China.
　　国际合作
International Cooperation
　　为促进儿童保护领域的国际合作，中国政府和社会力量在扎实、有效地做好国内儿童生存、保护和发展工作的同时，还积极参与有关儿童生存、保护和发展的全球性和区域性国际合作与交流活动。多年来，中国与联合国儿童基金会、联合国教科文组织和世界卫生组织在有关儿童保护领域进行了卓有成效的合作，得到了有关国际组织和权威人士的好评。
To promote international cooperation in the protection of children, the Chinese Government and society at large have taken an active part in global and regional international cooperation and exchanges regarding children's survival, protection and development while devoting themselves to this cause in a down-to-earth and effective manner. In recent years, China has achieved great success through cooperating with the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF), the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) in its work to protect children. In this regard, China has been highly praised by international organizations and authoritative persons in the child protection field.
　　中国政府总理李鹏代表中国政府签署了1990年世界儿童问题首脑会议通过的《儿童生存、保护和发展世界宣言》及《执行九十年代儿童生存、保护和发展世界宣言行动计划》两个文件，这既是对数亿中国儿童，也是对国际社会的庄严承诺。中国积极参与联合国制定《儿童权利公约》的工作，1989年第四十四届联合国大会审议并通过该公约时，中国是提出通过公约的决议草案的共同提案国之一。1990年12月29日，中国正式签署了该公约。翌年，中国全国人民代表大会批准该公约，公约于1992年4月1日正式对中国生效。公约是国际社会为保护儿童权利制定的一项普遍适用的标准，中国政府承担并认真履行公约规定的各项义务。
Chinese Premier Li Peng, on behalf of the Chinese Government, signed the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development of Children and the Plan of Action for Implementing the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development of Children in the 1990s (both adopted by the World Summit for Children in 1990), which represent a solemn promise made to several hundred million Chinese children as well as to the international community. China actively participated in working out the UN Convention on the Rights of Children. When the convention was examined and approved at the 44th Session of the UN General Assembly in 1989, China was one of the co-sponsor countries that raised the draft resolution for the approval of the convention. On December 29, 1990, China formally signed the convention. The following year, the NPC approved the convention, which formally became effective in China as of April 1, 1992. The convention is a universally applicable standard worked out by the international community for the protection of children's rights. The Chinese Government has undertaken and conscientiously fullled the obligations specied in the convention.
儿童的健康与保健
 Children's Health and Care 
　　中国政府和社会各界高度重视儿童的健康和保健，为保护儿童的生命和健康做了大量艰苦细致的工作，成效明显。
The Chinese Government and various circles in Chinese society have paid great attention to the health and care of its children. Much painstaking work has been done in protecting children's lives and health. As a result of these efforts, remarkable success has been achieved.
　　出生与死亡
Birth and Death
　　1995年，中国人口出生率为17.12‰，出生人口2063万人，人口自然增长率为10.55‰。
In 1995, China's birthrate was 17.12 per thousand and 20.63 million children were born, the natural growth rate being 10.55 per thousand. 
　　5岁以下儿童死亡率是衡量一个国家儿童状况的一项重要指标。据1994年全国妇幼卫生监测报告，中国的婴儿死亡率由五十年代初期的200‰下降到37.79‰，5岁以下儿童死亡率为46.75‰。1950年至1980年，中国婴儿死亡率的年平均下降速率在5%以上，此下降速率既快于同期发展中国家平均婴儿死亡率下降速率（2.5%），也快于发达国家年平均下降速率（4.6%）。九十年代以来，中国的婴儿死亡率、5岁以下儿童死亡率的年平均下降速率分别为6.50%和5.85%。目前，没有一个人均年收入和中国相近的国家达到如此水平。
The mortality of children under five years old is an important indication of the situation of children in a country. According to a national maternity and child-care monitoring report in 1994, the infant mortality of China decreased to 37.79 per thousand from 200 per thousand in the early 1950s and the mortality rate for children under five years old to 46.74 per thousand. From 1950 to 1980, the annual decrease rate of China's infant mortality was above five percent, higher than the annual decrease rate (2.5 percent) of the average infant mortality of developing countries in the same period and also higher than that (4.6 percent) of developed countries. In the 1990s, the annual rate of decrease of infant mortality in China is 6.50 percent and that of children under five years old is 5.85 percent. So far, no other country in the world enjoying an annual per capita income approximate to China has reached such a high level.
　　医疗保健
Medical Care
　　中国已建立了符合国情的妇幼卫生服务体系，为实现“2000年人人享有卫生保健”的全球战略目标，遍布于城乡的三级医疗预防保健网，向广大儿童提供卫生保健和计划免疫服务。
In order to realize the global strategic target whereby everybody would enjoy health care by the year 2000, a maternity and child hygiene service system commensurate with its national conditions has been established in China and a three-level network of medical treatment, prevention and health care has been developed in its rural and urban areas, providing health care and planned immunity services for children.
　　应用价格低廉的疫苗对儿童进行免疫是既经济又有效的预防传染病、降低儿童死亡率的手段。中国自五十年代开始在全国普种痘苗，并在六十年代初成功地消灭了天花这一严重危害儿童健康的传染病。六十年代后，中国开始在大、中城市接种卡介苗、百日咳、白喉、破伤风、麻疹、脊髓灰质炎的疫苗的工作。七十年代每年利用冬春季节开展免疫活动，并于1978年开始在全国范围内普及儿童计划免疫工作。这项工作的开展，有效地降低了相应传染病的发病率和死亡率。
Using vaccines for children is an economical and effective way for preventing epidemic diseases and reducing children's deathrate. From the 1950s, China began to popularize the bovine vaccine and in the early 1960s, smallpox, an infectious disease seriously endangering children's health, was eliminated. After the 1960s, China began to inoculate BCG, pertussis, diphtheria, tetanus, measles and poliomyelitis vaccines. In the 1970s, activities for immunity from diseases were carried out during winters and springs; and in 1978 work on planned immunity for children was started on a nationwide scale. All this has led to a great drop in the incidence of the relevant infectious diseases and the mortality from such diseases.
　　八十年代，中国积极响应世界卫生组织扩大免疫规划号召，统一了儿童免疫程序，实行预防接种证制度，成立了计划免疫专家委员会，加强对计划免疫工作的技术指导，并与联合国儿童基金会合作开展冷链建设，使计划免疫得到进一步发展。1985年，中国政府正式宣布，分两步实现普及儿童免疫目标，即1988年以省为单位、1990年以县为单位儿童免疫接种率分别达到85%。1989年和1991年，联合国儿童基金会、世界卫生组织和中国卫生部联合对中国的计划免疫工作进行了两次审评，结果表明，中国按期实现了儿童免疫接种率目标，其中以县为单位计划免疫各种疫苗接种率在90%以上。
In the 1980s, readily responding to the proposal of the WHO to expand the country's immunity program, China unified children's immunity procedures, initiated the system of issuing inoculation certificates, established the Specialists Committee for Planned Immunity and strengthened technical guidance for planned immunity work. At the same time, China cooperated with the UNICEF in the cold chain development, carrying work in this respect further. In 1985, the Chinese Government announced officially that its target for immunizing children would be realized in two steps, i.e. the inoculation rate of children would be 85 percent by 1988, counted at the provincial level, and again 85 percent by 1990, counted at the county level. In 1989 and 1991, the UNICEF, the WHO and the Ministry of Public Health of China jointly carried out two evaluations of China's work of planned immunity. The results showed that China had fulfilled, on schedule, its target on children's immunity and the inoculation rate of various vaccines was over 90 percent, counted at the county level.
　　为消灭脊髓灰质炎，中国在加强对儿童常规免疫工作和对脊髓灰质炎监测工作的基础上，自1993年12月至1996年1月每年的12月5日和1月5日，在全国范围内对4岁以下儿童进行了三次六轮强化免疫，每轮免疫儿童约8000万。强化免疫活动的开展，有力地推动了消灭脊髓灰质炎的工作进程。
In order to eliminate poliomyelitis, while strengthening regular work on immunity and the monitoring of poliomyelitis, China performed nationwide six rounds of reinforced inoculations on children under four years old, on December 5 and January 5 separately in each of the three years 1993-96, each round involving about 80 million children. In this way the timetable for eliminating poliomyelitis has been shortened.
　　中国实施计划免疫工作以来取得了巨大成就，传染病大幅度下降。据全国常规疫情报告资料：1994年麻疹、白喉、百日咳、脊髓灰质炎发病数分别比1978年下降了96.4%、99.4%、99.3%、97.5%；死亡数分别下降了97.4%、99.3%、96.5%、97.7%；1994年上述四种传染病发病总数较1978年减少了约351.7万例，死亡减少约1.3万例。1995年除云南省从外籍过境来滇就医的一名脊髓灰质炎患儿粪便中分离到一株野病毒外，全国尚未从急性弛缓性麻痹病例中分离到脊髓灰质炎野病毒。
Since the implementation of China's immunization program, great achievements have been made and the incidence of infectious diseases has sharply declined. A national report on the country's epidemic situation reveals that the number of cases of measles, diphtheria, pertussis and poliomyelitis in 1994 dropped by 96.4, 99.4, 99.3 and 97.5 percent respectively compared with 1978; the death rate decreased by 97.4, 99.3, 96.5 and 97.7 percent respectively. In 1994, the number of incidences of the above-mentioned four epidemic diseases fell by about 3.517 million and the number of deaths by about 13,000 as compared with 1978. In 1995, only one strain of a wild virus was found in the stool of a child suffering from poliomyelitis who came from abroad to Yunnan for medical treatment. No other poliomyelitis wild viruses were found in Acute Flaccid Paralysis cases.

中国计划免疫工作取得的成绩得到了国际社会的高度赞誉。
China's immunization achievements have been highly praised by the international community. 

1989年10月16日，当时的联合国儿童基金会执行主任詹姆斯·格兰特将一枚联合国儿童生存银质奖章授予中国卫生部卫生防疫司，以表彰中国在普及儿童免疫工作中所取得的巨大成绩。1994年11月24日和1995年8月8日，世界卫生组织总干事中岛宏博士和世界卫生组织西太区主任韩相泰博士先后致函中华人民共和国国务院总理李鹏和全国人大常委会委员长乔石，高度赞扬并肯定了中国取得的成绩，他们代表世界卫生组织对中国在消灭脊髓灰质炎方面所取得的进展表示非常满意，认为在世界卫生领域中国再次发挥了重要作用。
On October 16, 1989, a silver medal was awarded to the Chinese Health and Antiepidemic Department of the Ministry of Public Health by the then UNICEF executive director, James P.Grant, to commend China's achievements made in children's immunity work. On November 24, 1994 and August 8, 1995, Dr Hiroshi Nakajima, Director General of the WHO, and Dr S.T.Han, Director of Western Pacific Regional Office of the WHO, successively wrote letters to Li Peng, Premier of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, and Qiao Shi, Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, in which they spoke highly of these achievements and, on behalf of the WHO, expressed their great satisfaction with China's work in eliminating poliomyelitis. They held that China had played an important role in the world public health field.

中国还将降低肺炎和腹泻的死亡率作为儿童医疗保健工作的重要而紧迫的任务。
China considers reducing children's mortality caused by pneumonia and diarrhoea as an important and urgent task of its medical and health work for children. 

中国卫生部为此制定了《全国儿童呼吸道感染控制规划（1992－1995）》和《腹泻病控制规划（1990－1994）》，通过推广适宜技术、逐级培训、健康教育、管理监测指导系统等措施来降低婴幼儿尤其是农村婴幼儿的死亡率。急性呼吸道感染（AIR）标准病例管理项目已于1994年扩展到全国的24个省（自治区、直辖市）的53个县，腹泻病控制项目已覆盖17个省（自治区、直辖市），并将急性呼吸道感染标准病例管理和腹泻病防治内容培训推广到300个贫困县，36万多乡村医生接受了培训。
For this purpose the Chinese Ministry of Public Health has formulated the National Plan on Controlling Infection Children's Respiratory Tract (1992-95) and the Plan on Controlling Diarrhoea (1990-94) and implemented a series of measures, such as popularizing proper techniques, personnel training, health education and monitoring systems. These have all served to reduce infant mortality, especially rural infant mortality. Management projects on standard AIR cases had been expanded to 53 counties in 24 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities and diarrhoea control projects had covered 17 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities by 1994. And at the same time, 360,000 township and village doctors from 300 poor counties have been trained on managing standard AIR cases and controlling diarrhoea.

在中国，1949年以前，新生儿破伤风是新生儿死亡的主要原因。
Before 1949, tetanus was one of the main causes of death in China's newborn babies. 
五十年代和六十年代在全国范围内建立了妇幼卫生保健机构，将新法接生作为控制产褥热和新生儿破伤风的主要措施，取得了很大成绩。1993年中国卫生部提出进一步降低新生儿破伤风死亡率，使之达到2000年时的国际消除标准。1995年中国卫生部颁发了《全国消除新生儿破伤风行动计划》，根据调查和监测资料，筛选新生儿破伤风高发地区，并在继续推广严格的新法接生提高住院分娩率的同时，迅速开展对育龄妇女的破伤风类毒素免疫工作。
Health centers for women and children were set up throughout China from the 1950s to the 1960s and new methods for child delivery as a major measure for controlling puerperal fever and tetanus neonatorum have been crowned with remarkable success. In 1993, the Ministry of Public Health of China put forward a new task to further reduce infant mortality caused by tetanus, so as to meet the 2000 international standard for eliminating tetanus. In 1995, the Ministry of Public Health promulgated the National Action Plan on Eliminating Tetanus Neonatorum. Basing on data gathered from investigation and monitoring, it designated areas highly susceptible to tetanus neonatorum attacks and, while continuing to popularize the new methods of child delivery and encourage hospital childbirths, strove to rapidly develop immunization work among women of childbearing age.
　　营养状况
Nutritional Status
　　中国重视不断改善儿童的营养状况，采取了多种医疗保健措施：建国初期政府在部分地区发放婴儿食品；六十年代、七十年代推广科学膳食制度；八十年代开发辅助食品；九十年代促进母乳喂养、优化膳食模式。儿童营养状况逐步提高，由食物缺乏引起的严重营养不良和严重维生素A缺乏症在中国已很少见。
China has paid great attention to improving children's nutritional status and various medical and health measures have been adopted. In the early period after the founding of the People's Republic of China, the government handed out infant foodstuffs in some areas. From the 1960s to the 1970s, a scientific diet for children was popularized in China. The nutritional status of Chinese children has gradually improved since the supplementary food was developed in the 1980s and since breastfeeding was advocated and dietary scheme was optimized in the 1990s. Now it is rare to find cases of serious malnutrition caused by shortage of food or cases of serious vitamin-A deficiency.
　　自八十年代起，中国一些地区开始使用生长发育图，对儿童的生长趋势进行监测，并通过“社区营养监测”的方法，争取尽早发现问题并及时给予针对性的指导和干预。实践证明，这是一种较为适宜的儿童保健工作方法。
Since the 1980s, a chart has been used in some areas of China to monitor children's natural growth and a community nutrition monitoring program introduced. If something abnormal is detected by such monitorings, timely guidance and treatment are given. Experience has proved that this is a proper method to maintain the health of children.
　　中国响应世界卫生组织和联合国儿童基金会的倡议，大力开展促进母乳喂养、创建爱婴医院的活动，将2000年实现以省为单位母乳喂养达到80%作为《九十年代中国儿童发展规划纲要》的一项主要目标，并承诺到1995年创建1000所爱婴医院。为此，中国卫生部于1992年5月向全国发出了《关于加强母乳喂养工作的通知》，并制定有关法规，加强对母乳代用品的销售管理，限制母乳代用品的销售活动。在各级政府的领导下，中国开展了大规模的以创建爱婴医院为主的爱婴行动。到1995年底的三年间，全国已创建2957所爱婴医院，居全球各国创建爱婴医院之首，为全球的爱婴行动作出了积极贡献。中国创建爱婴医院活动得到了联合国儿童基金会、世界卫生组织的高度评价。
In response to the proposals of the WHO and UNICEF, various activities to promote breastfeeding and build "baby friendly hospitals" have been developed. China planned to bring the breastfeeding rate on the provincial level up to 80 percent by the year 2000 as a major target for the Outline of the Program for Chinese Children's Development in the 1990s and it also promised to build 1,000 "baby friendly hospitals" by 1995. To this end, the Ministry of Public Health issued the Notice on Strengthening the Work on Breastfeeding in May management of the sale of mother's milk substitutes, so as to impose restrictions on the sale of such substitutes. Under the leadership of governments at various levels, a "baby friendly program" with the establishment of baby friendly hospitals as the main part was carried out in a big way. By the end of 1995, 2,957 baby friendly hospitals had been constructed, ranking first in number in the world-a significant contribution to the world baby friendly program. These efforts have won for China the high opinion of the UNICEF and WHO.
　　中国还通过加强乡镇卫生院、县防疫站、县妇幼保健院的建设来提高农村儿童的医疗保健水平，改善其营养状况。1991年以来，中央财政投资3亿元，带动全国各级财政和集体经济、农民群众共同筹资86.5亿元。截至1994年底，全国36%的乡镇卫生院、29.8%县防疫站、27.7%县妇幼保健院的建设得到了不同程度的改善。
At the same time, in order to improve the level of medical treatment and health care and the nutritional status of children in rural areas, measures for promoting the building of township clinics, county antiepidemic stations and county health centers for women and children have been adopted by the state. Since 1991, 300 million yuan from central finance has been allocated and 8.65 billion yuan from local financial administrations, collective economy and peasants had been pooled for input that direction. By the end of 1994, the conditions at 36 percent of the township clinics, 29.8 percent of the county antiepidemic stations and 27.7 percent of the county health centers for women and children have been improved by various degrees.
　　调查结果表明，中国儿童营养状况有了相当程度的改善。1995年与1990年相比，5岁以下儿童营养不良发生率下降了23.82%，提前实现了《九十年代中国儿童发展规划纲要》提出的中期目标。
Investigations show that childer's nutritional status in China has improved considerably. Compared with 1990, the rate of malnutrition in children under five years old dropped by 23.82 percent in 1995, fulfilling, ahead of the time, the medium-term target envisaged in the Outline of the Program for Chinese Children's Development in the 1990s.
儿童的教育
 Education for Children 
　　中国政府一直把儿童教育置于整个教育事业发展的优先地位。在政府和全社会的共同努力下，近年来，中国的儿童教育事业有了很大发展，许多指标优先于其他发展中国家，有的接近发达国家水平。
The Chinese Government always gives pride of place to children's education in the promotion of education in general. Thanks to the mutual efforts made by the government and society, children's education in China has seen great progress in the past few years, with many indexes higher than those of other developing countries and some indexes close to those of developed countries.
　　大力增加教育投入
Vigorously Increase Input in Education
　　近年来，中国确立了以财政拨款为主，其他多种渠道筹措教育经费为辅的教育经费筹措体制，并规定中央和地方政府的教育拨款的增长要高于财政经常性收入的增长，使按在校学生人数平均的教育费用逐年增长。
In recent years, China has established an educational fund-raising system, whereby financial allocations are the predominant source, with funds collected through other channels as a supplement. It is stipulated that the increase of allocations for education by the central and local governments should be higher than the increase of regular revenue, thus ensuring a year-by-year increase of average educational appropriations for every student.
　　据统计，1994年中国用于小学教育经费达594亿元，每个学生平均事业性公用经费89.47元；用于普通中学教育经费已达435亿元，每个学生平均事业性公用经费239.89元。
According to statistics, in 1994 China spent 59.4 billion yuan on primary education, with operating expenses for public use averaging 89.47 yuan per student; 43.5 billion yuan was spent on ordinary middle schools, with operating expenses for public use averaging 239.89 yuan per student.
　　中国政府十分关注边远、贫困和少数民族地区的教育事业。八十年代以来，国家设立了普及小学教育补助费和发展职业教育、师范教育、民族教育补助费等。国家教委和财政部决定从1995年到2000年，利用中央普及义务教育专款和地方各级政府的配套资金，组织实施“国家贫困地区义务教育工程”。这项工程总投入预计100多亿元，重点用于改善贫困地区小学、初中学校的办学条件。
The Chinese Government pays great attention to educational development in remote and poor areas, as well as areas inhabited by national minorities. Since the 1980s, the state has appropriated school aid for the popularization of primary education, and subsidies for developing vocational education, normal education and education for national minorities. The State Education Commission and the Ministry of Finance have decided that in 1995-2000, the special funds allocated by the central government for the popularization of compulsory education, plus the supporting money provided by the local governments, should be used to implement the National Compulsory Education Project in Poor Areas. It is estimated that over 10 billion yuan will be put into the project. The money will be used mainly to improve conditions in primary schools and junior middle schools in poor areas.
　　中国还努力通过多种渠道筹措教育经费。据不完全统计，1991－1994年间，中国多渠道筹措用于改善中小学办学条件的经费共338亿元，使全国绝大多数中小学的教学仪器、图书资料、文体器材和校园设施等有了不同程度的改善和充实。
China has been making great efforts in raising educational funds through various channels. According to incomplete statistics, during 1991-94, it collected a total of 33.8 billion yuan for primary and middle schools to buy more and better quality teaching aids, books and reference materials, sports requisites and campus facilities.
　　发展学前教育
Develop Preschool Education
　　动员全社会的力量，采取多种形式，多渠道地发展幼儿教育，在当地政府举办幼儿园的同时，鼓励单位、团体及个人根据有关规定举办幼儿园，是中国发展学前教育的方针之一。近年来，由于各级政府和全社会的大力支持和积极参与，中国学前教育事业稳步发展，已形成了国家、集体和公民个人一起办幼儿园的局面。1995年中国有幼儿园18万所，在园儿童2711.23万人，3－5周岁儿童入园率达42.2%。在城市，幼儿教育形式多为全日制幼儿园，辅之部分寄宿制和部分学前班。在农村，经济发展情况较好的地区已做到乡乡有中心幼儿园，村村有学前班。一些经济发展落后、人口居住分散、交通不便的农村、山区和牧区，除了努力创造条件举办学前班外，还有儿童活动站、游戏小组和巡回辅导组等非正规幼儿教育形式。
Mobilizing the whole society to develop preschool education in vari"ious forms and channels and encouraging not only government institutions and enterprises but also mass organizations and individuals to open kindergartens in light of relevant regulations--this is one of the principles adopted by China in developing preschool education. In recent years, due to the vigorous support and active participation of governments at all levels and society at large, China's preschool education has been developing steadily. A new era has dawned in which kindergartens are run by the state, the collectives and the individuals together. By 1995 China had 180,000 kindergartens, with an enrollment of 27.1123 million children. In all, 42.2 percent of children aged 3-5 years old go to kindergartens. In urban areas, full-time kindergarten is the dominant form of preschool education, with the boarding system and preschool classes as a supplement; in rural areas where the local economy is better-developed, central kindergartens can be found in every township and preschool classes in every village. In backward countryside, mountain and pastoral areas, which are remote and sparsely populated, while endeavoring to create conditions for running preschool classes, people are opening children's activities stations, games groups, mobile groups giving children guidance, and other nonregular forms of preschool education.
　　提高适龄儿童入学率
Higher Enrollment Ratio for Children of School Age
　　普及九年义务教育，是中国实施基础教育的一项主要目标。由于政府的努力和全社会的大力支持，到1995年，全国小学在校生13195万人，小学适龄儿童入学率为98.5%；在校生辍学率为1.49%；小学毕业生升学率为90.8%。按中国现行测定普及小学义务教育的标准，占全国人口91%的地区基本普及了初等教育。根据联合国教科文组织的材料，中国的适龄儿童入学率明显高于其他同等发展水平的国家。
Popularization of compulsory nine-year schooling is the key goal of China's elementary education program. Thanks to the government's effort and powerful support from society, in 1995 the number of children attending primary school reached 131.95 million, with an enrollment rate of 98.5 percent for children of school age. In addition, only 1.49 percent of the students discontinued their studies and 90.8 percent of the primary school graduates entered a higher school. According to China's present standard on popularization of compulsory primary schooling, elementary education has been basically popularized in areas covering 91 percent of the country's population. UNESCO statistics show that the enrollment ratio of school-age children in China is much higher than in other countries of the same economic development level. 
　　女童教育是发展中国家儿童教育面临的突出问题。新中国成立时，全国女童入学率只有15%。建国后，中国政府采取了许多措施，使女童教育有了很大发展，男女儿童入学率差距逐年缩小，较好地解决了许多发展中国家至今尚未解决的问题。据统计，1995年全国小学适龄女童入学率为98.2%，男女性别差仅为0.7个百分点，女在校生比例占47.3%。
Education for girls is a key problem which faces developing countries in the field of children's education. When New China was firstly founded, the country's enrollment rate of girls was only 15 percent. The Chinese Government later took many measures so that great progress was made in education for girls and the gap between enrollment rates of boys and girls was reduced year by year. China therefore has solved a problem which remains unsolved in many other developing countries. According to statistics, in 1995 the enrollment ratio of school-age girls in primary schools was 98.2 percent, only 0.7 percentage point lower than that of boys; girl students accounted for 47.3 percent of total primary school enrollment.
　　救助失学儿童
Help for Children Unable to Go to School
　　在中国贫困地区，存在着因家庭贫困而失学的小学生。各级政府把帮助贫困家庭儿童就学纳入各类扶贫计划，采取各种措施帮助这些儿童重返校园。同时，在政府的关心和大力推动下，社会各界也纷纷伸出援助之手，使失学儿童获得受教育的基本权利。
In China's poor areas there are children unable to go on to school because of poverty. Governments at all levels have incorporated help for children from poor families to enter school in their help-the-poor programs and, at the same time, have taken various measures to help them return to school. In the mean time, thanks to the concern of and vigorous promotion by the government, people from all walks of life have been helping these children, enabling them to enjoy the fundamental right to education.
　　1989年10月，中国青少年发展基金会在北京宣布实施“希望工程”。它通过设立助学金，长期资助贫困地区因家庭经济困难失学的孩子重返校园，并为一些贫困乡村新建、修缮校舍，购置教具、文具和书籍等；通过“百万爱心行动”、“1（家）＋1助学行动”等活动，广泛动员全社会的力量来帮助贫困地区的失学儿童重返校园。到1995年底，“希望工程”已筹集资金6.9亿元，资助125万失学儿童继续其小学学习，并资助建设了2000多所希望小学。
In October 1989, the China Youth Development Foundation initiated the Hope Project in Beijing. It provides grants-in-aid as long-term financial assistance to children in poor areas who dropped out of school because of straitened family circumstances, thus enabling them to return to school. In some poor rural areas, it also helps build or repair schoolhouses and buy teaching aids, stationery and books. It has sponsored the ``One Million People's Love Movement'' and the ``1 (family) + 1 (dropout) Help Movement,'' mobilizing the entire society to help dropouts return to school. By the end of 1995, the Hope Project had raised 690 million yuan, given financial assistance to 1.25 million children for continuing primary education and subsidized construction of over 2,000 Hope Project primary schools.
　　从1989年开始，中国儿童少年基金会实施了“春蕾计划”，设立帮助女童入学的专项基金，对贫困地区的女童实施免费初等义务教育。“春蕾计划”1994年和1995年两年共资助10万名失学女童重返校园。
The China Children's Foundation began to carry out the Spring Buds Program in 1989. It established a special fund to help girls enter school, enabling girls in poor areas to receive charge-free compulsory primary education. In total, the Spring Buds Program helped 100,000 girls return to school in 1994 and 1995. 
残疾儿童的保护
 Protection of Disabled Children
　　中国高度重视残疾儿童的保护，努力为残疾儿童的生存和发展创造良好条件。
China has all along attached great importance to protecting disabled children, making great efforts to create favorable conditions for their survival and development.
　　权益保护
Protection of Disabled Children's Rights and Interests 
　　中国重视残疾儿童的权益保护。在中国0－14岁儿童中，有残疾儿童900余万人，占全国同龄儿童总数的2.66%。中国的宪法和有关法律对保护包括残疾儿童在内的残疾人的合法权益有明确的规定。《残疾人保障法》对保障残疾人合法权益作了全面、系统的规定，包括残疾人在政治、经济、文化、社会和家庭生活等方面享有同其他公民平等的权利；禁止歧视、侮辱、侵害残疾人；国家有计划地开展残疾预防工作；保障残疾人康复、教育、劳动、娱乐、福利等权益。这些规定都适用于残疾儿童。该法还对残疾儿童的特殊保护问题作了专门规定。
The Chinese Government has devoted much attention to guaranteeing the rights and interests of disabled children. Among children aged 14 and under, there are over 9 million disabled, accounting for 2.66 percent of children of the same age group in China. The Chinese Constitution and relevant laws contain clear statements regarding the rights and interests of the disabled, including disabled children. The Law on the Protection of Disabled Persons contains all-inclusive, systematic provisions guaranteeing the legitimate rights and interests of the disabled. It states clearly that the disabled enjoy equal rights with other citizens in all spheres: political, economic, cultural, social and family life; that discrimination, insult and harassment against the disabled are prohibited; that the state should develop disability prevention programs; and that the rights of the disabled to rehabilitation, education, labor, entertainment and welfare should be protected. While all these provisions also apply to disabled children, the law includes specific statements on special protection of disabled children. 
　　为保障残疾人权益，促进残疾人事业的发展，经中国政府批准成立了残疾人的代表、服务和残疾人事业的管理机构中国残疾人联合会（简称中国残联），它的一项重要任务就是保护残疾儿童的合法权益。在地方，建立了省（自治区、直辖市）、地、县残联，对本地包括残疾儿童在内的残疾人事业实施服务和管理。
In order to protect rights and interests of the disabled and promote their cause, the China Disabled Persons' Federation (CDPF), an organization that represents the disabled, serves their interests and administrates the work concerning the disabled, has been established with the approval of the Chinese Government. One of its principal tasks is to protect the lawful rights and interests of disabled children. Also, local disabled persons' federations at the provincial (autonomous regional and municipal), prefectural and county levels have been established to serve the disabled, including disabled children in the region, and administrate their affairs.
　　残疾预防与康复
Disability Prevention and Rehabilitation
　　中国政府实行预防为主的方针，采取一系列措施预防儿童的先天致残。
Following the policy of putting prevention rst, the Chinese Government has adopted a series of measures to prevent children's congenital disability.
　　中国大力开展强化计划免疫，有计划、大规模地给儿童少年补碘，并进一步治理地方病，控制环境污染，对地甲病、克汀病、大骨节病流行地区，采取补碘、改土净水等措施。同时，各级政府和医疗保健机构严格执行《婚姻法》、《母婴保健法》及预防先天残疾的有关法规，控制有害遗传，加强婚育、孕产系统管理，搞好婚前检查、婚前教育、产前检查、遗传咨询、围产期保健、母婴保健、早期教育等服务工作。
China has expended great eorts in strengthening the immunization program and in planned, large-scale replenishment of iodine for children. In order to further control endemic diseases and curb environmental pollution, it has taken effective measures such as replenishing iodine, improving soil and purifying water in regions where goiter, cretinism and Kaschin-Beck disease are rampant. The Marriage Law, the Law on Health Protection of Mothers and Infants and relevant regulations for preventing congenital disability have been strictly implemented by governments and medical and health institutions at all levels. In order to curb harmful heredity and improve prenatal, birthing and postnatal education and administration, services like premarital check-ups and education, prenatal examinations, heredity consultancy, birthing-process care, mother-baby care and early education have been strengthened.
　　中国政府为帮助残疾儿童恢复或者补偿功能，增强其参与社会生活的能力做了大量工作，效果良好。
The Chinese Government has expended great efforts and attained remarkable achievements in helping disabled children recover maximum health and in enhancing their abilities to participate in social life.
　　开展“三项康复”（小儿麻痹后遗症矫治、聋儿听力语言训练以及白内障复明）工作。截至1995年底，共有36万小儿麻痹后遗症患者经矫治手术改善了功能，有效率达98%左右；完成6万多名聋儿康复任务，使他们都能开口说话，其中10%的康复聋儿进入普通幼儿园、小学学习；为3万名低视力儿童配用了助视器，提高了视力；使10万智残儿童增强了认知和自理能力。目前，中国已建立了全国聋儿康复研究中心和26座省级聋儿康复中心，以及1000多个残疾儿童康复站、寄托所、训练班。
China has actively developed the ``Three Recoveries'' program (rectifying polio sequelae, training deaf children in hearing and speech and performing cataract operations). By the end of 1995, China had rectified 360,000 children of polio sequelae (a success rate of 98 percent), helped more than 60,000 deaf children recover their hearing and speech abilities (10 percent of which had entered regular kindergartens and elementary schools to receive regular education), had provided 30,000 poor-sighted children with sight aids and helped 100,000 mentally retarded children enhance their cognitive capacity and self-suciency. At present, China has established the National Rehabilitation Research Center for Deaf Children, in addition to 26 provincial-level rehabilitation centers for deaf children and over 1,000 rehabilitation stations, kindergartens and training classes for disabled children.
　　建立社区康复服务体系。中国利用城乡三级医疗预防保健网开展社区康复，使城乡基层的大多数残疾儿童能够享有基本的康复服务。同时，在各级地方政府领导下，成立了由卫生、民政、残联等有关部门参加的社区康复领导小组，相互协调、分工合作，共同制定社区康复规划，并组织实施。
Community rehabilitation service systems for disabled children also have been set up. China has fully used the urban-rural three-level network of health services to develop community rehabilitation, helping most disabled children in grassroots areas enjoy basic rehabilitation services. Moreover, under the leadership of local governments at different levels, community rehabilitation leading groups have been founded, consisting of public health departments, civil administration departments, disabled persons' federations and other relevant departments, which coordinate and cooperate with each other to mutually formulate community rehabilitation plans and manage their implementation.
　　1982年，中国民政部与联合国儿童基金会开展了“残疾儿童社区康复”合作项目。到1994年为止，已在全国23个省的32个市、县建立了残疾儿童康复网络，对残疾儿童工作者及家长进行了系统的培训，有效地提高了残疾儿童康复工作的管理水平。
In 1982, the Chinese Ministry of Civil Affairs started to cooperate with the UNICEF in the Community Rehabilitation for Disabled Children project. By the end of 1994, the rehabilitation network for disabled children covered 32 cities and counties in 23 provinces of the country and systematically trained disabled children's parents and rehabilitation instructors. These efforts were successful in effectively improving the management of the rehabilitation work for disabled children.
　　残疾儿童教育
Education for Disabled Children 
　　中国的《教育法》、《义务教育法》、《残疾人保障法》、《残疾人教育条例》等法律法规中，对残疾儿童教育的职责、特点、发展方针、办学渠道、教育方式等作出了全面、系统的规定。根据有关法律法规，中国政府将残疾儿童教育纳入义务教育。
Regarding disabled children's education, the Education Law, the Compulsory Education Law, the Law on the Protection of Disabled Persons and the Regulations for Disabled Persons' Education clearly and completely state the duties, characteristics, guiding principles of development, channels for running schools and methods of instruction, etc. According to relevant laws and regulations, the education of disabled children is compulsory.
　　在中国，经过多年努力，以在普通学校附设特殊教育班和随班就读为主体、以特殊教育学校为骨干的残疾儿童义务教育格局已经形成。到1995年底，全国残疾人特殊教育学校已达1379所，比1980年增长4倍，普通学校附设特教班6510个，在校生总数（含随班就读学生）达29.6万人，比1980年增长8倍。全国盲、聋、弱智儿童的平均入学率已达60%，在经济发达地区达到80%。
After years of efforts, China has formed a compulsory education set-up for disabled children, which takes special-education schools as the backbone and special-education classes attached to, and attendance of individual disabled students in, ordinary schools as the main body. By the end of 1995, China had set up 1,379 special-education schools for the disabled, an increase of 400 percent over 1980; there were also 6,510 special-education classes attached to ordinary schools with 296,000 disabled students (including those attending regular schools), an increase of 800 percent over 1980. In 1995 the national average school enrollment rate of blind, deaf and mentally retarded children reached 60 percent; in the economically developed areas enrollment reached 80 percent.
　　社会环境
Social Environment
　　中国动员社会采取多种方式关心和帮助残疾儿童的成长，大力弘扬残疾儿童自强不息的精神，倡导团结、友爱、互助的社会风尚。大众传媒积极反映残疾儿童生活，报道残疾人事业发展情况。广播、电视普遍开办残疾儿童专题节目，并配制手语、字幕。逐步实行方便残疾人的城市道路和建筑物设计规范，采取无障碍设施等措施，为残疾儿童的生存和发展创造良好的社会环境。
The Chinese Government has done a great deal of work to mobilize various circles in society to care for, in various manners, the development of disabled children, to greatly encourage the spirit of unceasing self-improvement among disabled children and to advocate the social virtues of unity, friendship and mutual aid. The Chinese media actively reports on the life conditions of disabled children and the work concerning the disabled. Virtually all radio and TV stations offer specific programs for disabled children, compounded with sign language and captions. To create a favorable social environment for disabled children's survival and development, China has worked out and gradually implemented Standards for the Design of Urban Roads and Buildings for the Disabled's Convenience, which require obstacle-free structures when municipal works and various buildings are constructed.
　　中国政府规定，自1991年起，每年5月的第三个星期日，为全国助残日。少年儿童积极开展“红领巾助残”活动；青年积极开展“志愿者助残行动”。社会各界也通过各种方式广泛参加各种形式的助残活动。残疾儿童在全社会的关心下，得到了多方面的实际帮助和服务。
Since 1991, the Chinese Government has legally established National Helping-the-Disabled Day on the third Sunday in May every year. Children actively take part in Young Pioneers Helping the Disabled activities while young people enthusiastically participate in Volunteers Helping the Disabled activities. Meantime, the broad masses of people all over the country also widely participate in various activities to help the disabled. Closely looked after by the government, disabled children have also been receiving many types of help and services from various circles in society.
儿童福利院
 China's Welfare Homes for Children 
　　中国的儿童福利院工作是中国儿童工作的特殊组成部分。儿童福利院和其他也监护养育部分儿童的社会福利院监护养育的儿童主要是因天灾和不可预测事故失去双亲的孤儿，同时也监护养育因身患难以完全康复的智残、肢残等重残或因严重疾病而被父母遗弃的儿童，目前，这类在院监护养育的儿童共有2万名左右，约占中国未成年人总数的十万分之五左右。
China's welfare homes for children play a special role in the country's efforts to care for children. The welfare homes and some social welfare institutions that also accept orphans oer guardianship and rearing mainly to children who have lost their parents during natural disasters or accidents, and also to those abandoned by their parents because they are seriously or almost irremediably disabled mentally or physically, or because they have contracted a serious illness. Currently, there are about 20,000 such children under the guardianship and rearing of welfare institutions, accounting for five per one hundred thousand of the total number of juveniles in China.
　　监护养育
Rearing Under Guardianship 
　　在中国，由民政部门具体负责孤儿和被遗弃的病残儿童的监护养育和安置工作。
In China, such rearing and emplacement of orphans or children abandoned for physical disability are under the charge of civil administration departments.
　　中国现阶段的孤儿的监护养育办法是：一部分由国家和集体举办社会福利事业单位集中监护养育，直至他们长大成人，对监护养育的痴呆和重残孤儿实行终身供养；另有一部分分散在社区群众家中寄养，福利院对其实行监护；还有一部分由国内公民根据法律规定收养，少部分被外国公民依法收养。
These are the ways that orphans are reared under guardianship in China: social welfare institutions set up by the government or collectives oer guardianship and rearing to some of the orphans till their adult age and give life support to idiotic and seriously disabled orphans under their care; some orphans are brought up in citizens' homes under the guardianship of welfare institutions; some orphans are adopted by domestic citizens and a small number by foreign citizens according to relevant laws.
　　截至1995年底，由各地政府投资举办的儿童福利院73所，监护养育孤儿和被遗弃的病残儿童8900人，全国城市的1200多个社会福利院和部分农村敬老院，也监护养育部分孤儿和被遗弃的病残儿童，还有一些孤儿和被遗弃的病残儿童或分散在群众家中寄养，或由群众依法收养。此外，全国各地区还兴办了孤儿学校、康复中心、弱智儿童培训班、残疾儿童康复站、社区康复站等为社区孤儿、残疾人服务的组织近万个，社会个人或组织还兴办社会福利机构上百家。
By the end of 1995, there were a total of 73 welfare homes for children set up by local governments, oering guardianship and rearing to 8,900 orphans and abandoned ill or disabled children. More than 1,200 social welfare institutions in urban areas and some homes for the aged in rural areas have also oered guardianship and rearing to orphans and abandoned ill or disabled children. Some orphans and abandoned ill or disabled children are under the care of or legally adopted by common people. Moreover, there are a total of nearly ten thousand organizations serving orphans and disabled persons in communities throughout China, such as schools for orphans, rehabilitation centers, training classes for mentally retarded children, rehabilitation stations for disabled children and community rehabilitation stations, as well as about a hundred social welfare institutions established by individuals or organizations.
　　除政府和社会建立福利院抚养孤儿和被遗弃的病残儿童外，中国还积极开展公民收养工作，使这些丧失家庭的儿童重新得到家庭的温暖，健康成长。为了保护合法的收养关系，维护当事人的合法权利，有利于被收养的未成年人的抚育、成长，中国全国人民代表大会常务委员会制定了《收养法》，根据该法，经国务院批准，司法部、民政部发布施行了《外国人在中华人民共和国收养子女实施办法》。中国的孤儿收养工作有法可依，也完全符合联合国《儿童权利公约》提出的原则。
Apart from welfare institutions set up by the government and the society to take care of orphans and abandoned children, China encourages citizens to adopt these children so that they can enjoy a normal family life and grow up sound of body and mind. In order to protect legal adoption and the legal rights of the persons concerned, and to benefit the care and growth of adopted juveniles, the NPC Standing Committee of China stipulated the Adoption Law. According to this law, the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Civil Affairs, with the approval of the State Council, published for implementation the Procedures for the Adoption of Children by Foreigners in the People's Republic of China. The adoption of orphans in China has laws to go by and is in full accord with the principles put forward by the United Nations in the Convention on the Rights of Children.
　　实施收养的各种手续是严格依法进行的。不论是中国公民还是外国人，收养都必须符合法律规定的条件和程序。中国政府的各有关部门在为当事人办理收养手续的过程中，严格按法律规定收取各项费用。根据法律规定，收养人要向福利院支付被收养人抚育费，支付的数额主要通过协商确定，该项费用用于改善福利设施和院内孩子的生活。
All adoption procedures are done strictly according to law. Both Chinese citizens and foreigners shall meet the conditions required by law and go through all necessary procedures. While handling the adoption procedures for the person concerned, the related departments of the Chinese Government charge the fees strictly according to law. As required by law, the adoptor shall pay to the welfare home the cost for upbringing of the adoptee, which will then be used to improve living conditions for other children in the institution. This cost is determined mainly through negotiations between the two parties.
　　经 费
Funds
　　中国儿童福利院的经费，以国家和地方财政拨款为主，集体集资、发行福利彩票和社会捐助为辅。其中财政拨款列入当年财政预算，实行全额拨款。1990－1994年，仅地方财政用于城市各类福利院儿童养育费用直接投入就达5.15亿元，其中40%左右直接用于儿童生活，年平均增长25.5%，保证了福利院儿童生活的基本需要。五年来，国家专门用于改善儿童福利院办院条件的资金7.4亿元，其中中央和地方投入福利彩票募集的福利资金2.4亿元，地方财政投入1.5亿元，社会捐赠3.5亿元。
Most of the funds for China's welfare homes for children come from appropriations by state and local financial departments (the funds being budgeted as full operating expenses for welfare homes in the financial report of each year), supplemented by other means, such as collective fund raising, welfare lotteries and donations. From 1990 to 1994, local financial departments had appropriated a total of 515 million yuan directly to urban welfare homes for children (of this total, 40 percent being used directly for the livelihood of the children), at an annual increase rate of 25.5 percent, thus guaranteeing the basic needs of the children. During this period, the state appropriated 740 million yuan specially for the improvement of welfare homes for children, including 240 million yuan raised from welfare lotteries published by central and local governments, 150 million yuan from local financial departments and 350 million yuan from donations.
　　由于各地经济发展水平不同，各儿童福利院获得的经费数额也有所不同。在经济发达地区，儿童福利院每个儿童每月平均费用400－500元，欠发达地区的儿童福利院每个儿童每月平均费用200－300元，在中国相对较低的物价水平的情况下，福利院儿童的生活费用一般都不低于当地居民生活的平均水平。
The funds received by each welfare home around the country are different due to the various levels of economic development in each area. In economically developed areas, the average expense per child per month is 400 to 500 yuan while in the less developed areas, the amount is 200 to 300 yuan. Living expense of the children in the welfare homes is usually no lower than that of local citizens, in view of the fact that prices are comparatively low in China. 
　　管理制度
Administrative System 
　　中国的儿童福利院已形成一套较完善的系统的管理制度。如：规定入院的儿童需经观察期，在为时2－3个月的观察期里，由有关部门寻找其父母或进行身份认定，做体格检查，实行医护隔离，使儿童入院后身体健康，不带传染病；规定福利院必须有一定数量的专业技术人员，其中国家一级福利院专业技术人员需占职工总数的70%以上，二级福利院占65%以上。各个儿童福利院都制定了规章制度，各项工作规程有十分严格的要求，这些制度和规程涉及到福利院内部管理及儿童生活的各个方面，如养育、护理、医疗、康复、科研、培训、社区康复、后勤保障等。
China's welfare homes for children have adopted a fairly complete, systematic administrative system. The system requires that the children shall be under a two to three month observation period before they are accepted. During the observation period the related departments search for the child's parents or confirm his or her identification while at the same time the child is given a comprehensive physical examination and isolation is practiced on children suffering from infectious diseases. The system also requires that there shall be a certain number of specialized personnel in each welfare home -- the specialized personnel in first-level state welfare homes shall account for above 70 percent, and in second-level, above 65 percent, of the total welfare home staff. Each welfare home for children has drawn up strict rules and regulations concerning every aspect of internal management and of the children's lives -- upbringing, nursing, medical care, rehabilitation, scientific research, community rehabilitation, training, and supporting service.
　　为了监督这些管理办法的执行，民政部门经常进行检查，对执行好的单位予以表彰，对严重违反规定的单位与个人予以处罚。
To supervise the implementation of these administrative procedures, the civil affairs departments have carried out regular inspections. Units that perform well are commended and those units or individuals who seriously violate regulations are penalized.
　　“养、治、教”相结合的方针
The Principle of Combining Upbringing, Treatment and Education
　　中国的儿童福利院实行“养、治、教”相结合的办院方针，重养、重治、重教。
The welfare homes for children in China practice the principle of combining upbringing, treatment and education.
　　羸弱无助的孤儿和被遗弃的病残儿童在福利院得到精心照料和养育，他们中的许多人在这里长大成人后走上了社会。1976年的唐山大地震造成了4200余名失去父母的孤儿，大的16岁，小的才几个月，在政府和社会各界的热忱关心和帮助下，他们中除由其亲属领养外，其余的都先后被安置在邢台市的儿童福利院和唐山市、石家庄市等地的孤儿学校，生活和学习费用大都由国家负担。1995年10月，由福利院监护养育的最后一位唐山大地震的孤儿王安也离开了福利院，到一家医院工作。位于长春的吉林省儿童福利院，建院38年来，已有2478名孤儿于这里长大成人后走上了社会。
Due to the special care given to China's helpless orphans and abandoned ill or disabled children, many of them have grown up and found jobs. With help from the government and people from all circles, the more than 4,200 orphans left in the 1976 Tangshan earthquake -- from a few months to 16 years old, except for those adopted by their relatives -- were all settled in the Xingtai Welfare Home for Children and at orphans' schools in Tangshan and Shijiazhuang. Most of their living and study expenses were borne by the state. In October 1995, Wang An, the last ``Tangshan earthquake orphan,'' left the welfare home that had oered him guardianship and rearing to work in a hospital. The Jilin Provincial Welfare Home for Children in Changchun has brought up 2,478 orphans since its establishment 38 years ago.
　　来到福利院的儿童，大部分入院时身患重病或有严重的先天性残疾。儿童福利院很重视对这些儿童的医疗和康复，使病残儿童最大程度地得到救治。对重度病残儿童，福利院将其送往所在地区的医院进行治疗。1995年经治疗脱残的儿童达200余人。儿童福利院均配有医生、康复师、营养师，设置医务室、康复室、抢救室、化验室和药房，对监护养育儿童所患疾病及时进行医治。许多儿童福利院在政府和社会各界的关心下，拥有了较先进的医疗设施，以满足儿童的基本医疗需求。目前，中国已有一支热爱孤残儿童福利事业的专业人员队伍，儿童福利院中医护人员占正式工作人员的32%。
When they come to welfare homes, most children are suffering from serious illness or inherent disabilities. Welfare homes have paid much attention to treating these children to the most degree. Ill or disabled children in serious condition are sent to local hospitals for better treatment. In 1995, the number of the children nursed back to health exceeded 200. Welfare homes for children boast doctors, rehabilitators, nutritionists, as well as clinics, rehabilitation rooms, emergency treatment rooms, laboratories and pharmacies, giving timely treatment to ailing children. With help from the government and from people in all walks of life, many welfare homes own fairly advanced medical equipment to meet the basic needs of their children. At present, China has a professional staff who are devoted to the well-being of orphans and disabled children; medical personnel account for 32 percent of the total welfare home staff.
　　从1995年起，民政部与卫生部在全国实施了残疾孤儿康复工程，大型医院对施行手术的孤儿免费住院，半费收取手术费和治疗费。福利院的残疾儿童，都不同程度地参加了形式多样的康复训练。一些经过康复训练的残疾儿童已恢复或基本恢复了身体功能。
Since 1995, the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the Ministry of Pub"ilic Health have jointly launched health projects for disabled orphans throughout the country. Under the project, large hospitals give free hospitalization to orphans who need to undergo operations, and charge half of the normal surgical operation and treatment fees. Disabled children in welfare homes take part in various rehabilitation training programs, and some of them have recovered or basically recovered from disability.
　　在儿童福利院，智力健全的儿童，无论是否身体残疾，均与正常儿童一样全部接受义务教育。对盲、聋、弱智的儿童，由福利院负责把他们送到特殊教育学校学习。此外，国家还举办了30余所专门的孤儿学校，针对这些儿童的身心特点进行教育；有的实行义务教育和职业教育相结合的办校方针，使孤儿毕业后有一技之长。为方便重度残疾儿童接受教育，各儿童福利院均建立了特殊教育班，培养孩子们的生活自理能力。政府从1989年起设立了特殊教育专项资金，1995年这项资金为2300万元人民币，其中用于儿童福利院特教班的经费为110万元。
At welfare homes, children with normal intelligence, no matter if they are physically handicapped or not, receive compulsory education like other children. Blind, deaf and mentally retarded children are sent to special education schools. In addition, the state has set up over 30 schools especially for orphans. These schools educate children according to their physical and mental abilities and characteristics; some schools even combine compulsory education with vocational education to enhance the students' career opportunities. For seriously disabled children, every welfare home has set up a special education class that teaches self-sufficiency. In 1989, the government established a separate fund for special education. In 1995, the fund totalled 23 million yuan, of which 1.1 million yuan was appropriated to special education classes at welfare homes.
　　群众性助孤活动
Mass Movements to Help Orphans 
　　中国政府倡导助孤活动，要求全社会都来关心和帮助孤儿健康成长。近几年，中国群众性助孤活动日益深入。
The Chinese Government encourages activities to help orphans and has called upon the whole society to show concern for orphans. In recent years, mass movements to help orphans have blossomed.
　　群众性献爱心活动广泛开展，涌现出一批志愿者队伍。在上海、北京等地开展的“好心人抱一抱孤儿”、“为孤残儿童献爱心、送健康”、“援助孤儿大行动”、“爱心同盟”等活动，均得到社会各界的积极响应。在这些活动中，众多城市的许许多多家庭或在节假日或在平时纷纷将福利院的儿童接到自己家中，使他们能享受到家庭的温暖和爱抚。
A mass campaign encouraging kindness to orphans is now wide"ispread and volunteers are numerous. In Shanghai and Beijing, campaigns such as ``Let kind-hearted people give orphans a big hug,'' ``Offer your affections to orphans and disabled children and bring health to them,'' ``Help orphans in every way'' and ``Link your hearts to orphans' hearts'' are enthusiastically responded to by people from all walks of life. In these campaigns, many urban families take children from children's welfare institutions and let them stay in their homes during holidays or at ordinary times so that these children can enjoy the warmth and affection of a family.
　　成立中华慈善总会，宣传慈善事业，广泛募集捐助。截至1995年底，中华慈善总会已在全国各地发展了44个地方组织作为团体会员，总会系统共募集社会捐助1亿多元，其中相当一部分用于资助孤儿就业培训和为孤儿实施脱残手术。
The China Charity Federation was established to promote charities and extensively collect donations. By the end of 1995, the China Charity Federation had recruited 44 local organizations throughout China as group members and it had collected donations of over 100 million yuan. A considerable amount of the money was used to support orphans in vocational trainings and perform corrective surgical operations on disabled children.
　　社会各界关心儿童福利院，向儿童福利院捐款捐物，支持儿童福利院不断改善养育、救治和教育条件。山东省青岛市、新疆维吾尔自治区策勒县等一些地方建立了孤儿福利基金。上海市儿童福利院仅1994年和1995年就收到社会各界的捐款440万元。目前，全国已有8000名孤儿得到入学资助。
People from all walks of life show much concern for children's welfare institutions. They donate money and materials to help the institutions improve their conditions. This allows the institutions to improve the quality of their care and education. Welfare funds for orphans have been established in Qingdao, Shandong Province, Cele County in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region and other places. In 1994 and 1995 the Shanghai Municipal Welfare Home for Children received 4.4 million yuan in donations. At present, 8,000 orphans throughout China are financially supported in their school education.
　　个人兴办福利院的积极性日见高涨，民间社会福利机构不断增多。广州市个人举办的社会福利机构的床位已占该市社会福利机构总床位的10%。
Individuals are becoming ever more enthusiastic about running children's welfare homes and non-governmental welfare homes are on the increase. In Guangzhou the number of beds in social welfare institutions run by individuals now account for 10 percent of all social welfare institution beds.
　　中国在儿童的生存、保护和发展方面作出了巨大的努力，取得的成就受到联合国儿童基金会、联合国教科文组织和世界卫生组织以及其他国际组织和有关人士的积极评价。同时，中国政府清醒地看到，由于中国是一个人口众多的发展中国家，经济基础较薄弱，人均收入在世界各国中仍处于比较落后的位置，城市与农村之间、地区之间发展水平还很不平衡，儿童工作还存在着许多困难，不少方面的情况还需要继续改善。比如：在儿童的医疗保健方面，中国农村儿童的疾病发生率还较高，某些贫困地区的儿童营养状况还低于正常标准；在儿童的教育方面，一些边远和贫困地区学校教学条件困难，中小学生的失学现象在一定程度上还存在；在残疾儿童的保护方面，国家在较短的时间内还难以筹集到更多的经费，充分满足保护残疾儿童的实际需要；由于各地经济发展水平不同，有些儿童福利院办得较好，有些则因经济困难条件较差。因此，随着国家经济和社会的发展，不断改善中国儿童的状况，促进儿童事业的发展，仍然是中国政府面临的一项重要任务。中国政府将一如既往地继续为之不懈努力，中国的儿童事业必将得到更大的发展。
China has made great efforts to support the survival, protection and development of children. The UNICEF, UNESCO, WHO and other international organizations and public figures all made positive comments on China's achievements in this connection. Of course, the Chinese Government is sober about the fact that since China is a developing country with a large population and since its economic foundation is still comparatively weak, its per capita income is in a rather rear position in the world per capita income listings and its development level is unbalanced between city and countryside and between different areas, there is much difficulty in the work for children and therefore much room for improvement. Take medical care for children, for example. The incidence of disease among children in the countryside is high and in some poor areas children's nutrition is below the normal level. As for children's education, the teaching conditions in some outlying and poor areas are not up to par and the phenonmenon of primary and middle school children discontinuing their studies still exists. As for the protection of disabled children, the state is not able to amass in a short period enough money to fully satisfy the actual needs in the protection of these children. Since the level of economic development varies from area to area, some welfare homes are better run than others with economic diculties. Therefore, as China develops economically and socially, an important task facing the Chinese Government is to constantly improve children's conditions and promote activities and programs to help children. The Chinese Government will continue to work persistently toward this end, as it has done in the past, and the cause of children will surely develop further as a result.
附　录 
Appendix
英国第四频道和“亚洲人权观察”组织对中国儿童福利院的描述和指责是站不住脚的
The Description and Accusations About China's Children's Welfare Institutions by Britain's Channel Four and the Human Rights Watch/Asia Do Not Hold Water

英国商业电视台第四频道于1995年6月14日播出的《秘密亚洲死亡屋》和1996年1月9日播出的《重返死亡屋》(它是前者的翻版)采用拙劣的手法，指称中国儿童福利院存在着虐待儿童致死的“死亡屋”。经调查核实，《秘密亚洲死亡屋》中的所谓“死亡屋”，实际上是湖北省黄石市社会福利院的一间库房，片中的其他一些主要情节也是编造的。
The British commercial television station Channel Four broadcast ``Secret Asia, the Dying Rooms'' on June 14, 1995, and ``Return to the Dying Rooms'' (a refurbished version of the former) on January 9, 1996. Using clumsy tricks, the programs stated that in China's children's welfare homes there were dying rooms where children were abused to death. An investigation proved that the so-called dying rooms in the program ``Secret Asia, the Dying Rooms'' refer actually to a warehouse in the Huangshi City Social Welfare Home in Hubei Province and that the major part of the program is fabricated.  
　　该片的炮制者凯特－布莱维特等人是假冒“美国儿童基金会”工作人员来到湖北黄石市社会福利院的。据该院保育员刘秋凉回忆，凯特－布莱维特等人来后，她发现其中一个外国男子在院后的一间库房拍摄。当时库房里面有一些旧床，墙角堆放着物品。那个外国男子将已打捆堆放的物品解开，摆放在床上，然后进行拍摄。刘问他，为什么到库房来，弄乱了物品?那个外国男子嘀咕了几句便出去了。正是这间库房，后来在片子中竟被指称为“死亡屋”。《死亡屋》称，1994年有80多名儿童在这间屋子里死去。这完全是杜撰的数字。这家福利院的统计表和1994年接受送养和认领的名单显示，当年该院共有161名儿童，当年陆续被领养的儿童为128人，怎么可能有80多人死去呢?将由于许多儿童被送养和认领后空出来的床，称为儿童死去留下的床，将库房指为“死亡屋”，这是对事实别有用心的歪曲。
Kate Blewett, producer of the program, and others visited the Huangshi welfare home, disguising themselves as staff members of the American Children's Fund. After Blewett, et al arrived, recalled Liu Qiuliang, nurse of the welfare home, she found one of the foreigners, a man, filming in a warehouse at the back of the courtyard. At that time, there were some old beds in that warehouse and some other articles were lying around. The cameraman untied the articles, spread them on the bed and began to shoot. Liu came to the warehouse and asked him what he was doing. He just grunted and came out. This is the warehouse which was later labeled as the ``dying rooms'' in the television program. The ``Dying Rooms'' claimed that in 1994 more than 80 children died in that house. This is sheer fabrication. The welfare home's statistics record and the list of children taken in or identified and adopted shows that there were 161 children in the institution in 1994 and 128 were adopted later in the year. How come more than 80 children died? Claiming that the empty beds formerly used by children who were later adopted or identified and so left the welfare home were the beds of dead children and further referring to the warehouse as the ``dying rooms'' is deliberate distortion of facts.
　　《死亡屋》片中讲述了一个所谓“没名”病童无人照顾，病重没有得到医治，只有等死的故事。这是凯特－布莱维特等人在广东省肇庆市端州区福利院拍摄的。据了解，这位病童是1995年2月20日由当地派出所捡到后送福利院的，当时已经病得很重。福利院在这位病童入院后即对其进行了救治。负责照料“没名”病童的保育员杨金英介绍说，凯特－布莱维特等人在进入病儿室时让她留在门外不要进去，而片子中却说，保育人员都不愿进入这间病房。当时是冬天，凯特－布莱维特等人进屋后就掀掉病童的棉被，解开病童的衣服。杨劝阻他们说，天太冷，孩子有病，但凯特－布莱维特说没有关系。凯特－布莱维特自己穿着皮衣，却让病孩光着身子。他们拍摄了十五至二十分钟，拍摄完后也不给病童穿好衣服盖上被子，便扬长而去。这位病童后因救治无效而死亡。凯特－布莱维特等人企图通过展示并渲染这位病重儿童的病状来说明一些女婴在福利院受虐待致死，用这种编造肆意对观众进行欺骗和误导，不能不使人感到气愤。
The ``Dying Rooms'' recounted a story about a ``nameless,'' seriously ill child who was left unattended without any medical treatment, waiting for death. The shots were taken by Blewett and others at Duanzhou District Welfare Home, Zhaoqing City, Guangdong Province. As far as we know, the sick child was found on February 20, 1995 on the street by someone from a local police station; the child was then sent to the welfare home. The child was seriously ill when admitted to the welfare home, and the welfare home immediately gave the child medical treatment. Yang Jinying, the nurse who was responsible for looking after the ``nameless'' child, said that after Blewett and others entered the sick child's room, they told Yang to stay outside. Contrary to fact, the television program claimed that nurses hardly ever went into that room. It was winter and after Blewett and company entered the room, they removed the sick child's warm cotton-batting quilt and unbuttoned the latter's clothes. Yang tried to stop them. She said that it was cold and the child was sick. But Blewett said it did not matter. Wearing a fur coat, Blewett had the sick child stripped to the waist and shot for 15 to 20 minutes. After they finished shooting, they left the child undressed and didn't even cover the latter with the quilt. The sick child later died despite medical treatment. By playing up the condition of the sick child, Blewett and others intended to say that girls were systematically abused to death in the welfare homes. Using wanton fabrication to cheat and mislead viewers cannot but arouse indignation among the people.
　　《死亡屋》电视片还编造了一个妇女被强迫堕胎的“悲惨故事”。该片向观众介绍说这位妇女被警察得知未经许可就怀了第二胎时,她被迫堕胎,还给她做了绝育手术。而事实是，这位家住广西阳朔金阳村的妇女叫谢莲凤。当凯特－布莱维特等人尾随谢的婆婆从村口来到她家,并询问她生了几个孩子时,谢告诉他们：“生了一男一女”。凯特·布莱维特等人又问：“还能再生吗?”谢说：“已经结扎了，不能再生了”。据谢介绍，她从未做过流产，与她生活在一起的两个兄嫂也未做过。当善良老实的谢莲凤得知凯特－布莱维特等人将她当时的介绍编成了怎样的故事时，她气愤地说：“他们胡说八道！”
The ``Dying Rooms'' made up another ``miserable story'' about a woman's forced abortion. It said that when the police were informed that a certain woman was pregnant with her second child (without having obtained prior permission), she was forced to have an abortion and a sterilization operation. The facts are as follows: The woman, named Xie Lianfeng, lives in Jinyang Village, Yangshuo, Guangxi. Blewett and company followed Xie's mother-in-law to Xie's home and asked Xie how many children she had. When Xie told them she had a boy and a girl, Blewett and others asked if she could have any more children. Xie answered, ``I had a ligation of the oviduct. I cannot bear children now.'' Xie said that she had never had an abortion, nor had her two sisters-in-law who lived with her. When the kind-hearted and honest Xie was told how Blewett, et al distorted her story, she said furiously, ``They are talking rubbish!''
　　国际人口科学联盟(IUSSP)理事蒋正华指出：“从我们看到的情况来说，这个片子中描写的很多事情，有一些完全是无中生有，有一些是被歪曲了。所以我们看到这片子也感到很奇怪：作为标榜新闻要讲职业道德的这样一个机构，竟然拍出这样的片子来。我有很多学者朋友，他们看到了这样的片子也感到气愤。”瑞典国际领养家庭联合会总经理纽格伦指出：“我们看了这部片子非常气愤，因为我们有130个家庭去过中国，领养了孩子。很多人都认为这部片子是对中国福利院的不公正报道。……我去过世界许多国家的领养机构，能够比较不同国家领养机构的状况，所以我才对这部对中国福利院不公正报道的片子作出如此的反应。”
Jiang Zhenghua, council member of the IUSSP, pointed out, ``As far as what we have seen is concerned, of the many things described in the telefilm some are sheerly concocted out of thin air and some are distortions. I felt strange when I saw the film. How could an institution which parades professional ethics for news coverage have produced such a film. Many of my scholar friends are also furious about the film.''Britt-Marie Nygren, chief executive of the Family Association for Intercountry Adoption, Sweden, said, ``We were furious after we watched this film. There are 130 families in our association that have visited China and adopted children there. Many of them think that this film is an unjust report on China's welfare homes....I have visited many countries and seen their institutions responsible for adoption, so I can compare the conditions at institutions in different countries. That's why I reacted that way to this film's unjust reporting of the situation in China's welfare homes.'' 
　　凯特－布莱维特等人编造谎言，也许可以骗人于一时，但是不会长久的。开放的中国每年接待数百万外国来访者，他们都有机会看到与《死亡屋》电视片截然相反的事实。
Blewett and others may fabricate lies to cheat some people for sometime, but not for a long time. China, which has opened its door to the outside world, now receives millions of foreign visitors every year. They have opportunities to see the true situation, one which is completely contrary to what's described in the ``Dying Rooms.'' 

“亚洲人权观察”组织于1996年1月7日发表一份报告，对中国的儿童福利院状况进行无端指责。这份报告的许多内容是根据歪曲、夸大的东西拼凑的。
The Human Rights Watch/Asia made a gratuitous accusation in its report, published on January 7, 1996, on the situation of children's welfare homes in China. Many parts of the report are cooked up based on distorted and exaggerated matters.
该报告指责上海市儿童福利院虐待残疾儿童，是没有事实根据的。上海儿童福利院是一所由上海市政府主办的社会福利慈善机构。该院目前监护养育着500余名儿童，大部分为身患残疾的儿童，其中包括接受社会寄养的100多名伤残儿童。全院职工有320名，其中医务人员42名，老师23名，保育员220名。该院对孤儿采取供养、治疗、教育的方针。在供养方面重点是加强营养和保育。院里专门配备了一名营养师，根据孤儿的体质和年龄编制食谱，以适应他们健康生长发育的需要。在院儿童的营养状况普遍良好。在治疗康复方面，该院设立了住院部和儿童康复中心，对那些患有疾病的孩子或在院里治疗或送到市区各大医院治疗；对经治疗恢复健康的儿童，每年进行２次体格检查；凡是适应手术矫治的，送市内各大医院进行手术。近两年已对87名残疾儿童分别进行了手术治疗；对有运动障碍的儿童进行康复训练，康复率达90%。在教育方面，由福利院出资将智力正常、肢体残缺的学龄儿童送普通中小学就读，盲童和聋哑儿童分别送盲校和聋哑学校学习。该院在外读书的孩子现有32名，为了加强对这些孩子的教育，还专门配备了2名教师进行课外辅导和管理。该院在社会资助下创办了一所建筑面积2500平方米、操场1200平方米的学校，为无法到普通学校入学的孤残儿童提供了良好的学习环境。因此，生活在上海市儿童福利院的残疾儿童的合法权利是有保障的。
The censure of the report on the ``maltreatment'' of disabled children by the Shanghai Municipal Welfare Home for Children is not based on facts. The Shanghai children's welfare home is a social welfare charity institution directed by the Shanghai Municipal Government. The institution now oers guardianship and rearing to more than 500 children, most of whom are disabled, including over 100 disabled children entrusted to its care by the society. It has a staff of 320 members, including 42 medical personnel, 23 teachers and 220 nurses. The orphans in the welfare home receive food, medical treatment and education. Regarding the food supply for the orphans, the emphasis is placed on nutrition and nursing; the food menu, designed to meet the needs of growing children, is worked out by a nutritionist according to the physical conditions and ages of the orphans. As a result, the nutritional status of the children is good overall. With regard to medical care and rehabilitation, the welfare home has set up an in-patient department and a children's rehabilitation center. Sick children are taken care of in the welfare home or sent to larger hospitals in the city for treatment, and physical check-ups are conducted for those recovered from illness twice a year. Those who are suitable for rectification are sent to the city's major hospitals to receive the operation. In the last two years 87 disabled children have received surgical operations. Rehabilitative training has been practiced on children suffering from impaired or abnormal motion, with the recovery rate reaching 90 percent.In education, school-age children with physical deformities but normal mental conditions are sent, at the welfare home's expense, to study in ordinary primary or middle schools, while the blind and deaf-mutes are sent to special schools. There are 32 children who study outside the welfare home. In order to strengthen their education, two teachers are designated to instruct and take care of them after class. In addition, funded by the public, the welfare home has set up a school with 2,500 square meters of floor space and a sportsground of 1,200 square meters to provide the orphaned and disabled children who can not go out to study in ordinary schools with an excellent education environment. Judging from the above, the legal rights of the disabled in the Shanghai children's welfare home are well protected.
　　“亚洲人权观察”组织称，这一报告的许多内容是根据一个叫张淑云的女人提供的材料编写的。据了解，张淑云于1988年9月调到上海市儿童福利院，在该院化验室从事肝功能化验工作，1993年6月辞职。在该院工作期间，她因不安心工作，不听从工作安排，多次受到领导批评。她对此怀恨在心，并经常采取捏造事实的卑劣手法，“举报”福利院工作中存在的所谓问题。经上海市有关部门组织慎重的专门调查，否定了张的举报。张仍一再纠缠，并到处编造和散布谎言，对该院负责人进行人身攻击。该院的几十名职工对张的行径表示愤慨，曾多次联名对张提出批评。在有关当事人向司法机关起诉时，张便辞职经香港出走美国。在美国，张淑云怀着不可告人的目的，继续捏造事实，诬蔑上海市儿童福利院的工作，这完全是别有用心的。以这样的人提供的所谓材料对中国福利院状况进行指责，怎么能叫人相信呢?
The Human Rights Watch/Asia said many parts of its report were written according to data provided by a woman named Zhang Shuyun. It was learned, after investigation, that Zhang Shuyun came to the Shanghai Municipal Welfare Home for Children in September 1988 to work as a laboratory tech"inician for testing liver functions; she left the job in June 1993. During her time there she was criticized a great deal by her leaders for not setting her mind to her work and for disobedience regarding her work arrangement. For this, she harbored resentment and, while she was still an employee of the institution, resorted to fabricating a story about the ``problems'' that existed in the welfare home. After a careful investigation, the allegations present in her report were refuted by the relevant department in Shanghai, but she still quibbled over it, continuing to make up and spread rumors about the leaders of the welfare home and launching personal attacks against them. Dozens of staff members expressed their indignation and jointly criticized her several times. When the party concerned in the matter brought a lawsuit to the court, Zhang Shuyun resigned her post and left for the United States via Hong Kong. In the United States, Zhang continued her prevaricating, spewing stories slandering the work in the Shanghai children's welfare home. Obviously, she did all this with ulterior motives. How can people give credence to the materials provided by such a person for the purpose of slandering China's welfare institutions?
　　“亚洲人权观察”组织的报告渲染一张所谓“因受虐待而死于福利院”的病童的照片，对中国的儿童福利事业进行攻击。经核查，这位在1988年2月24日入院的病童由福利院取名叫简训，入院前患有严重的精神发育迟滞等病状，入院后在护理人员的精心救治照护下，一度体重有所增加，后因病情发展，病及呕吐中枢，喂食后即频繁呕吐，人逐渐消瘦，医生对其进行救治，喂食牛奶、静脉补液，但终因其吸收功能出现严重障碍，救治无效而于1992年7月17日病死。这些救治过程均有当时的诊断书证明。当过１１年内科医生、当时任该福利院院长的韩伟成介绍，简训这个病童是因中枢神经系统疾病引起吸收障碍而导致营养不良的，而根本不是什么因饥饿导致营养不良。“亚洲人权观察”和张淑云说简训是因饥饿致死，这是蓄意捏造用以欺骗和愚弄社会公众。
The Human Rights Watch/Asia in its report plays up the photograph of a sick child, claiming the death of the child was caused by his being maltreated in the welfare home. It was learned, after investigation, that the child, given the name of Jianxun by the welfare home, suffered a serious illness caused by mental retardation; after he entered the welfare home, on February 24, 1988, he put on weight under meticulous care and medical treatment. Later, his illness deteriorated and affected the vomiting center, which caused frequent vomiting after feeding. As a result, the patient grew thinner and thinner, but the doctors still persevered in their efforts, feeding him milk and giving intravenous injections. However, because of the serious handicap in his assimilating function, the treatment ended in failure and he died on July 17, 1992. The patient's medical treatment and care can be documented by the medical records kept. Han Weicheng, who was the principal of the children's welfare home at that time and himself a physician with 11 years standing, states that Jianxun's malnutrition was caused by malabsorption resultant from diseases of the central nervous system, certainly not by starvation. That the death of Jianxun was due to deliberate starvation, as claimed by the Human Rights Watch/Asia and Zhang Shuyun, is just a story made up by them to cheat and fool the public.
　　至于照片上简训双手被绑和袒露胸膛的情形，现院长周竹青和前院长韩伟成指出，上海市儿童福利院绝对不会如此对待简训，因为简训没有自伤行为，当时又那么虚弱，根本不需要采取任何保护性约束措施。即使对有的病人采取保护性的约束措施，也是严格按照医疗处理上的常规办法来做的，决不可能用绳子捆绑，像照片上这般绑扎的事，院里从来没有发生过，这显然是拍摄者特别布置的。据了解，张淑云在院工作期间，由于其工作表现不好，受到领导和同事批评，后来发现她经常指使由福利院监护养育长大的艾明偷偷地到一些病房拍照，并在拍照时有意将病童摆弄成某种姿势。艾明还叫另外两个大孩子展×和翟×同他一起拍照。据展×反映，照相机是张淑云给艾明的，拍摄时让翟×把孩子衣服解开。因此，“亚洲人权观察”的这张照片是怎么炮制出来的，张淑云最清楚。这种以卑劣的手法捏造事实、编造谎言的行径，为一切正直、善良的人们所不齿。
As for the scene in the photograph where Jianxun's hands are tied up and his chest exposed: Zhou Zhuqing, the present principal, and Han Weicheng, the former principal, of the welfare home deny this ever occurred, pointing out that it would have been utterly illogical to treat Jianxun like that, as there was no need to take any protective, restraining measures on this patient, who was very weak; and there were no signs that he would take any actions to injure himself. Even if there was a case in which a patient needed to be restrained, it would be handled strictly by regular medical means. There has never been a case at the Shanghai children's welfare home in which a patient was tied up with ropes. This photograph was obviously arranged. An investigation into Zhang Shuyun's history shows that she was criticized by her leaders and colleagues at the Shanghai children's welfare home due to her work quality. Later it was found that she often directed one of the young orphans at the welfare home, Ai Ming, to take photographs for her in secret. Before taking pictures Ai Ming put sick children in special poses and asked two bigger children Zhan and Zhai to help him. Zhan later reported that the camera had been supplied by Zhang Shuyun and that Zhai had been told to help to unfasten the clothes of the sick children. Therefore, it is Zhang Shuyun who knows most clearly how the photograph published by the Human Rights Watch/Asia was produced. Would any upright and decent person adopt such despicable means and create such spurious stories and rumors? 
　　“亚洲人权观察”的报告说，几十名患重病的孤儿被从上海市儿童福利院转移到崇明岛的上海市第二社会福利院，指称儿童福利院以此虐待儿童。事实是，因市儿童福利院旧房子大修，部分孤儿被临时安置到第二社会福利院，这是很正常的。有时老人社会福利院的房子大修时，也有一些老人临时搬到市儿童福利院去住。这何谈是虐待儿童？市儿童福利院将在院儿童抚养、教育至年满16岁后，他们中有的参加工作，还有一些大龄智力障碍者，因就业难，被分散安排到市里的其他四个福利院，崇明安排多些，其他地方少些。“亚洲人权观察”组织的报告将此指称为将重病儿童转移到崇明的福利院处置，这纯属无稽之谈。
The Human Rights Watch/Asia report also alleges that the Shanghai Municipal Welfare Home for Children maltreated their children by transferring dozens of the seriously sick orphans to the Shanghai Second Social Welfare Home on Chongming Island. The fact is that this occurred when the old houses of the children's welfare home needed large-scale renovation. As a result, some of the orphans were sent to the social welfare home temporarily, which was only normal. In fact, the same thing had happened before. Once, for instance, when the houses of a social welfare home for the aged in Shanghai needed major repair, some of the seniors there were transferred to the Shanghai Municipal Welfare Home for Children. Is this the maltreatment of children? The children in the Shanghai children's welfare home are transferred when they grow up at the age of 16. Some are sent out to take up jobs, while some, whose mental retardation prevents them from taking up jobs, are sent to four other welfare institutions in the city or on Chongming Island, the one on Chongming taking in more than those in Shanghai. Obviously, the claim that children with serious illnesses were sent to the social welfare home on Chongming Island, which is alleged in the Human Rights Watch/Asia report, is sheer nonsense.
　　“亚洲人权观察”组织的报告称，中国儿童福利院的资金，大部分为工作人员的工资、奖金等开支，用于儿童的食品、衣着和其他必需品的开支很少。事实是，以1994年为例，中国各级财政拨款用于城市各类福利院儿童的养育费用为1.69亿元，其中40%左右直接用作收养的孤残儿童的生活费用，还有20%左右则是有关的设备维修、人员培训和用以保证福利院正常工作的费用，工作人员的工资、奖金以及离退休人员的工资总共约占40%左右，根本不存在所谓的大部分资金被用作工作人员工资奖金的情况。而且，1994年中国城市各类福利院儿童的人均每月生活费用在281.7元，同年中国城镇的人均每月生活费用为264.9元，福利院儿童的人均生活费用高于城镇的人均生活费用。“亚洲人权观察”组织的指责是站不住脚的。
The report also says that most of the funds slated for China's welfare homes for children are used as sta salaries and bonuses -- and only a small part is used for buying food, clothing and other daily necessities of the children. In fact, the sum for bringing up children in urban welfare institutions of various kinds in China allocated by China's financial departments at different levels in 1994, for instance, totalled 169 million yuan, of which about 40 percent was used for the living expenses of the orphans and disabled children; about 20 percent was spent on equipment maintenance, staff training and daily operating expenses; finally, about 40 percent was used for staff salaries and bonuses and for retirement pensions. From the above figures it can be clearly seen that the claim that most of the funds were used for salaries and bonuses is inaccurate. Moreover, the average monthly living expenses for each child in urban welfare institutions in 1994 was 281.7 yuan, while that for each urban citizen was 264.9 yuan. This shows that the average daily expense for each child in the welfare institutions for buying daily necessities was higher than that of each urban citizen. The accusation of the Human Rights Watch/Asia, therefore, has no ground to stand on.
　　1996年1月8日，来自美国、英国、德国等20家西方新闻机构的近30位记者采访了上海市儿童福利院，在那里实地参观并座谈了解了4个小时。1月25日，美国、英国、法国、德国、荷兰、奥地利、丹麦、日本等10个西方国家的驻沪总领馆的官员们参观了上海市第二社会福利院。尔后，美国新闻机构记者也在那里进行了实地采访。他们看到的和所了解的，与“亚洲人权观察”组织的那份报告所描述的情形截然不同。在事实面前，谎言只能是谎言。因此，这一报告以及英国商业电视台第四频道播出的《死亡屋》一片对中国福利院的描述和指责，理所当然地遭到了美国、英国等许多国家人士的批评和谴责。
On January 8, 1996, nearly 30 reporters from 20 news agencies from the United States, Britain, Germany and other countries went to visit the Shanghai Municipal Welfare Home for Children. There they were shown around and talked with some of its staff members for four hours. On January 25, officials from the consulates general in Shanghai of ten countries, including the United States, Britain, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Austria, Denmark and Japan, visited the Shanghai Second Social Welfare Home. Afterward, American reporters visited it too. What they saw and understood is completely different from that described in the report published by the Human Rights Watch/Asia. When faced with the facts, a lie is always nothing but a lie. Therefore, the description of China's welfare institutions and the accusations hurled at them in the Human Rights Watch/Asia report and the ``Dying Rooms'' telefilm shown by the British commercial TV station Channel Four inevitably have met with criticism and condemnation from people in the United States, Britain and many other countries. 

中国的儿童福利院可以接受参观访问，并欢迎对外交流经验和合作，而且也一直是这么做的，几乎每天都有人去参观访问，或在儿童福利院做“志愿工作者”。一些国家的政府和政界人士，仅仅根据“亚洲人权观察”组织编造的这类报告，就对中国政府进行指责，是毫无道理的，也是不负责任的。
China's children's welfare homes accept visitors and welcome the exchange of experiences as well as cooperation with other countries. Nearly every day people go to visit these institutions; some work as volunteers. It is neither reasonable nor responsible that governments and political figures in some countries should denounce the Chinese Government merely on the basis of the report cooked up and dished out by the Human Rights Watch/Asia.

中国的宗教信仰自由状况
Freedom of Religious Belief in China 

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China

一九九七年十月·北京
October 1997, Beijing
 
目录  
Contents

中国的宗教现状
The Present Conditions of Religion in China

宗教信仰自由的法律保护
Legal Protection of the Freedom of Religious Belief

宗教信仰自由的司法行政保障和监督
Judicial and Administrative Guarantees and Supervision of the Freedom of Religious Belief

对独立自主自办宗教事业的支持
Support for Independence and Initiative in Management of Religious Affairs

对少数民族宗教信仰自由权利的保护
Protection of the Right to Freedom of Religious Belief for Ethnic Minorities

 
中国的宗教现状

The Present Conditions of Religion in China

中国是个多宗教的国家。中国宗教徒信奉的主要有佛教、道教、伊斯兰教、天主教和基督教。中国公民可以自由地选择、表达自己的信仰和表明宗教身份。据不完全统计，中国现有各种宗教信徒一亿多人，宗教活动场所8.5万余处，宗教教职人员约30万人，宗教团体3000多个。宗教团体还办有培养宗教教职人员的宗教院校74所。

China is a country with a great diversity of religious beliefs. The main religions are Buddhism, Taoism, Islam, Catholicism and Protestantism. Citizens of China may freely choose and express their religious beliefs, and make clear their religious affiliations. According to incomplete statistics, there are over 100 million followers of various religious faiths, more than 85,000 sites for religious activities, some 300,000 clergy and over 3,000 religious organizations throughout China. In addition, there are 74 religious schools and colleges run by religious organizations for training clerical personnel.

　　佛教在中国已有二千年历史。现在中国有佛教寺院1.3万余座，出家僧尼约20万人，其中藏语系佛教的喇嘛、尼姑约12万人，活佛1700余人，寺院3000余座；巴利语系佛教的比丘、长老近万人，寺院1600余座。

Buddhism has a history of 2,000 years in China. Currently China has 13,000-some Buddhist temples and about 200,000 Buddhist monks and nuns. Among them are 120,000 lamas and nuns, more than 1,700 Living Buddhas, and 3,000-some temples of Tibetan Buddhism and nearly 10,000 Bhiksu and senior monks and more than 1,600 temples of Pali Buddhism.

　　道教发源于中国，已有一千七百多年历史。中国现有道教宫观1500余座，乾道、坤道2.5万余人。

Taoism, native to China, has a history of more than 1,700 years. China now has over 1,500 Taoist temples and more than 25,000 Taoist priests and nuns.

　　伊斯兰教于公元七世纪传入中国。伊斯兰教为中国回、维吾尔等10个少数民族中的群众信仰。这些少数民族总人口约1800万，现有清真寺3万余座，伊玛目、阿訇4万余人。

Islam was introduced into China in the seventh century. Nowadays in China there are ten national minorities, including the Hui and Uygur, with a total population of 18 million, whose faith is Islam. Their 30,000-odd mosques are served by 40,000 Imams and Akhunds.

　　天主教自公元七世纪起几度传入中国，1840年鸦片战争后大规模传入。中国现有天主教徒约400万人，教职人员约4000人，教堂、会所4600余座。

Catholicism was introduced into China intermittently in the seventh century, but it had not spread widely until after the Opium War in 1840. At present, China has four million Catholics, 4,000 clergy and more than 4,600 churches and meeting houses.

　　基督教(新教)于公元十九世纪初传入中国，并在鸦片战争后大规模传入。中国现有基督徒约1000万人，教牧传道人员1.8万余人，教堂1.2万余座，简易活动场所(聚会点)2.5万余处。
 
Protestantism was first brought to China in the early 19th century and spread widely after the Opium War. There are about 10 million Protestants, more than 18,000 clergy, more than 12,000 churches and 25,000-some meeting places throughout China.      

　　在中国，全国性的宗教团体有中国佛教协会，中国道教协会，中国伊斯兰教协会，中国天主教爱国会，中国天主教主教团，中国基督教三自爱国运动委员会，中国基督教协会等。各宗教团体按照各自的章程选举、产生领导人和领导机构。

　　China has the following national religious organizations: Buddhist Association of China, Taoist Association of China, Islamic Association of China, Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association, Chinese Catholic Bishops' College, Three-Self Patriotic Movement Committee of the Protestant Churches of China, and China Christian Council. Religious leaders and leading organs of the various religious bodies are selected and ordained in accordance with their own regulations.

　　中国各宗教团体自主地办理教务，并根据需要开办宗教院校，印刷发行宗教经典，出版宗教刊物，兴办社会公益服务事业。中国与世界许多国家一样，实行宗教与教育分离的原则，在国民教育中，不对学生进行宗教教育。部分高等院校及研究机构开展宗教学的教学和研究。在各宗教组织开办的宗教院校中，根据各教需要进行宗教专业教育。宗教教职人员履行的正常教务活动，在宗教活动场所以及按宗教习惯在教徒自己家里进行的一切正常的宗教活动，如拜佛、诵经、礼拜、祈祷、讲经、讲道、弥撒、受洗、受戒、封斋、过宗教节日、终傅、追思等，都由宗教组织和教徒自理，受法律保护，任何人不得干涉。

　　Religious organizations in China run their own affairs independently and set up religious schools, publish religious classics and periodicals, and run social services according to their own needs. As in many other countries, China practices the principle of separating religion from education; religion is not a subject taught in schools of the popular education in China, although some institutions of higher learning and research institutes do teach or conduct research into religion. The various religious schools and institutes set up by the different religious organizations teach religious knowledge in line with their own needs. All normal clerical activities conducted by the clergy and all normal religious activities held either at sites for religious activities or in believers' own homes in accordance with usual religious practices, such as worshipping Buddha, reciting scriptures, going to church, praying, preaching, observing Mass, baptising, monkhood initiation, fasting, celebrating religious festivals, observing extreme unction, and holding memorial ceremonies, are protected by law as the affairs of religious bodies and believers themselves and may not be interfered with.

　　发生于1966年至1976年的“文化大革命”，对包括宗教在内的中国社会各个方面都造成了灾难性破坏。中国各级政府在纠正“文化大革命”错误的过程中，也为恢复、落实宗教信仰自由政策，作出了巨大努力，平反了宗教界人士蒙受的冤假错案，恢复开放了宗教活动场所。八十年代以来，中国基督教每年恢复、新建教堂约600所；到1996年底，累计印刷发行《圣经》达1800多万册，并受到多种免税优惠；中国基督教协会自1983年起编辑出版的《赞美诗》累计发行达800多万册。从1958年至1995年，中国天主教已先后自选自圣主教126位。近十余年中国天主教培养、祝圣的年轻神甫有900多人。北京基督教崇文门堂每周的主日礼拜有3000多人参加。天主教北京南堂每周日有4台弥撒，有2000多人参加，其中一台是专为在北京的外国人举行的英文弥撒。

　　The "cultural revolution" (1966 to 1976) had a disastrous effect on all aspects of the society in China, including religion. But in the course of correcting the errors of the "cultural revolution" governments at all levels made great efforts to revive and implement the policy of freedom of religious belief, redressed the unjust, false or wrong cases imposed on religious personages, and reopened sites for religious activities. Since the 1980s, approximately 600 Protestant churches have been reopened or rebuilt each year in China. By the end of 1996 more than 18 million copies of the Bible had been printed, with special tax exemption treatment speeding their publication. In addition, more than eight million copies of a hymn book published by the China Christian Council in 1983 have been distributed. From 1958 to 1995, a total of 126 Catholic bishops were selected and ordained by the Chinese Catholic church itself. In the past dozen years more than 900 young Catholic priests have been trained or consecrated by Chinese Catholicism. More than 3,000 Protestants attend the Sunday service at Chongwenmen church in Beijing each week. The Beijing Nantang Catholic Cathedral observes Mass four times each week with an attendance of more than 2,000. Of these, one Mass is held in English specially for foreigners in Beijing.

　　在漫长的历史发展中，中国各宗教文化已成为中国传统思想文化的一部分。中国的宗教徒有爱国爱教的传统。中国政府支持和鼓励宗教界团结信教群众积极参加国家的建设。各宗教都倡导服务社会，造福人群，如佛教的“庄严国土，利乐有情”，天主教、基督教的“荣神益人”，道教的“慈爱和同、济世度人”，伊斯兰教的“两世吉庆”等。

　　In the course of the country's long history, the various religions in China have become part of the traditional Chinese thinking and culture. It is traditional for Chinese religious believers to love their country and religions. The Chinese government supports and encourages the religious circles to unite the religious believers to actively participate in the construction of the country. The various religions all advocate serving the society and promoting people's well-being, such as the Buddhists' "honoring the country and benefiting the people", the Catholics and Protestants' "glorifying God and benefiting the people", the Taoists' "being benevolent, peaceful and harmonious, saving the world and benefiting the people", and the Islam's "praying to allah to give great reward in this world and hereafter".

　　在中国，各种宗教地位平等，和谐共处，未发生过宗教纷争；信教的与不信教的公民之间也彼此尊重，团结和睦。这既是由于源远流长的中国传统思想文化中兼容、宽容等精神的影响，更是因为中华人民共和国成立后，中国政府制定和实施了宗教信仰自由政策，建立起了符合国情的政教关系。

　　In China all religions have equal status and coexist in tranquillity. Religious disputes are unknown in China. Religious believers and non-believers respect each other, are united and have a harmonious relationship. This shows, on the one hand, the influence of traditional Chinese compatibility and tolerance, and, on the other, the fact that since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949 the Chinese government has formulated and carried out the policy of freedom of religious belief and established a politico-religious relationship that conforms to China's national conditions.

　　宗教信仰自由的法律保护

　　 Legal Protection of the Freedom of Religious Belief

　　中国公民的宗教信仰自由权利受到宪法和法律的保护。

　　Chinese citizens' right to the freedom of religious belief is protected by the Constitution and laws.

　　在《中华人民共和国宪法》中，宗教信仰自由是公民的一项基本权利。宪法第三十六条规定：“中华人民共和国公民有宗教信仰自由。”“任何国家机关、社会团体和个人不得强制公民信仰宗教或者不信仰宗教，不得歧视信仰宗教的公民和不信仰宗教的公民。”“国家保护正常的宗教活动。”同时也规定：“任何人不得利用宗教进行破坏社会秩序、损害公民身体健康、妨碍国家教育制度的活动。”“宗教团体和宗教事务不受外国势力的支配。”

　　In the Constitution of the People's Republic of China freedom of religious belief is a basic right enjoyed by all citizens. Article 36 of the Constitution stipulates, "Citizens of the People's Republic of China enjoy freedom of religious belief." It also goes on to say, "No State organ, public organization or individual may compel citizens to believe in, or not to believe in, any religion; nor may they discriminate against citizens who believe in, or do not believe in, any religion." Again, "the State protects normal religious activities," and "No one may make use of religion to engage in activities that disrupt public order, impair the health of citizens or interfere with the educational system of the State." In addition, "Religious bodies and religious affairs are not subject to any foreign domination."

　　中国的《民族区域自治法》、《民法通则》、《教育法》、《劳动法》、《义务教育法》、《人民代表大会选举法》、《村民委员会组织法》、《广告法》等法律还规定：公民不分宗教信仰都享有选举权和被选举权；宗教团体的合法财产受法律保护；教育与宗教相分离，公民不分宗教信仰依法享有平等的受教育机会；各民族人民都要互相尊重语言文字、风俗习惯和宗教信仰；公民在就业上不因宗教信仰不同而受歧视；广告、商标不得含有对民族、宗教歧视性内容。

　　China's Law on National Regional Autonomy, General Principles of the Civil Law, Education Law, Labor Law, Compulsory Education Law, Electoral Law of the People's Congresses, Organic Law of the Villagers' Committees, Advertisement Law, and other laws stipulate that all citizens, regardless of their religious beliefs, have the right to vote and stand for election; the legitimate property of religious bodies is subject to legal protection; education is separate from religion, and all citizens, regardless of their religious beliefs, enjoy equal educational opportunities in accordance with the law; the people of all ethnic groups should respect each other's languages, customs and habits, and religious beliefs; citizens shall not be discriminated against in terms of employment because of different religious beliefs; and no advertisements or trade marks shall include discriminatory contents against any ethnic group or religion.

　　中国政府颁布了《宗教活动场所管理条例》，以维护宗教活动场所的合法权益。条例规定：宗教活动场所由该场所的管理组织自主管理，其合法权益和该场所内正常的宗教活动受法律保护，任何组织和个人不得侵犯和干预。侵犯宗教活动场所的合法权益将承担法律责任。在宗教活动场所进行宗教活动也必须遵守法律、法规。

　　The Chinese government has promulgated the Regulations on the Administration of Sites for Religious Activities so as to protect the lawful rights and interests of such sites. The Regulations specify: Sites for religious activities shall be run independently by the administrative organizations thereof, whose lawful rights and interests and normal religious activities at the sites shall be protected by law. No organization or individual may violate or interfere with such rights, interests or activities. Anyone who encroaches on the lawful rights and interests of the sites for religious activities shall bear legal responsibilities. Religious activities conducted at the sites, however, must conform to laws and regulations.

　　中国政府还颁布了《中华人民共和国境内外国人宗教活动管理规定》，尊重在中国境内的外国人的宗教信仰自由，保护外国人在宗教方面同中国宗教界进行的友好往来和文化学术交流活动。外国人可以在中国境内的宗教活动场所参加宗教活动，可以应省级以上宗教团体的邀请讲经、讲道，可以在县级以上人民政府认可的场所举行外国人参加的宗教活动，可以邀请中国宗教教职人员为其举行洗礼、婚礼、葬礼和道场法会等宗教仪式，可以携带自用的宗教印刷品、宗教音像制品和其他宗教用品进入中国国境。外国人在中国境内进行宗教活动，应当遵守中国的法律、法规。

　　The Chinese government has promulgated the Provisions on the Administration of Religious Activities of Aliens Within the Territory of the People's Republic of China. China respects the freedom of religious belief of aliens within Chinese territory and protects their friendly contacts and cultural and academic exchanges with Chinese religious circles with respect to religion. Aliens may participate in religious activities at recognized sites for religious activities within Chinese territory. They may also preach at the invitation of Chinese religious bodies at or above the provincial level. Aliens may hold religious activities attended by aliens at sites approved by people's governments at or above the county level. They may invite Chinese clerical personnel to conduct such religious rituals as baptisms, weddings, funerals and prayer meetings, and may bring with them printed religious matter, audio-visual religious material and other religious articles for personal use while entering Chinese territory. Aliens who conduct religious activities within Chinese territory shall abide by Chinese laws and regulations.

　　中国对公民宗教信仰自由权利的法律保障，与有关国际文书和公约在这方面的主要内容是基本一致的。《联合国宪章》、《世界人权宣言》、《经济、社会、文化权利国际公约》、《公民权利和政治权利国际公约》、联合国《消除基于宗教或信仰原因的一切形式的不容忍和歧视宣言》以及《维也纳宣言和行动纲领》中关于宗教或信仰自由是一项基本人权，公民有宗教或信仰的选择自由，不得以宗教或信仰原因为由对任何人加以歧视，有宗教礼拜和信仰集会及设立和保持一些场所之自由，有编写、发行宗教或信仰刊物的自由，有按宗教或信仰戒律过宗教节日及举行宗教仪式的自由，促进和保护民族、种族、宗教和语言上属于少数的人的权利等，这些内容在中国的法律、法规中都有明确规定，并得到实行。

　　The legal protection of citizens' right to the freedom of religious belief in China is basically in accordance with the main contents of the concerned international documents and conventions in this respect. The following stipulations in the United Nations Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Convenient on Civil and Political Rights, the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief, and the Vienna Declaration and Action Program are all included in China's laws and legislation in explicit terms and are being put into practice: that freedom of religion or belief is a basic human right; people should enjoy freedom of religion or belief; no one should be discriminated against because of religious affiliation or belief; people should enjoy freedom of religious service and assembly, and the freedom to set up and maintain places of worship; they should have the freedom to compile and distribute printed materials pertaining to religion or belief; they should have the freedom to celebrate religious festivals and hold religious rites based on their faiths and morals; and they should have the right to promote and protect the rights pertaining to only a small number of people ethnically, racially, religiously and linguistically. 

　　中国法律规定，公民在享有宗教信仰自由权利的同时，必须承担法律所规定的义务。在中国，任何人、任何团体，包括任何宗教，都应当维护人民利益，维护法律尊严，维护民族团结，维护国家统一。这与联合国人权文书和公约的有关内容是一致的。《消除基于宗教或信仰原因的一切形式的不容忍和歧视宣言》中提出：“有表明自己选择宗教或信仰的自由，其所受限制只能在法律规定以及为保障公共安全、秩序、卫生或道德、或他人基本权利和自由所必要的范围之内。”《公民权利和政治权利国际公约》也提出：“任何鼓吹民族、种族或宗教仇恨的主张，构成煽动、歧视、敌视或强暴者，应以法律加以制止。”无论信仰宗教的公民还是不信仰宗教的公民，在法律面前一律平等。这也是一个现代文明和法治国家的基本要求。

　　According to Chinese law, while all citizens enjoy the right to freedom of religious belief they must also carry out duties prescribed by law. In China, all individuals and organizations, including all religions, must safeguard the people's interests, the sanctity of the law, ethnic unity and unification of the nation. This is in conformity with the relevant clauses of the UN documents and conventions on human rights. The Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief states: "Freedom to manifest one's religion or belief may be subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary to protect public safety, order, health or morals or the fundamental rights and freedom of others." The International Convenant on Civil and Political Rights notes: "Any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence shall be prohibited by law." Citizens who believe in religion and those who do not believe in religion are equal before the law. This is a basic requirement for modern civilization and nations subject to the rule of law.   

　　各国的历史、文化和国情不同，这决定了各国保护宗教信仰自由的实践会有不同的特点。中国在强调保护信教自由时，也强调保护不信教的自由，把两者置于同等重要的位置，从而在完整意义上体现了宗教信仰自由。这是对公民基本权利更充分、更全面的保护。

　　Each country has its own history, culture and national conditions, which decide that each country's protection of freedom of religious belief has its own characteristics. While stressing the protection of freedom of religious belief China pays equal attention to the protection of the freedom not to believe in religion, thus ensuring freedom of religious belief in a complete sense. This is a more complete and more comprehensive protection of citizens' basic rights.

　　中国政府认为，宗教信仰是公民个人的私事，而建设一个富强、民主、文明的社会主义现代化国家，维护国家的主权和民族的尊严，是包括信教和不信教群众在内的中国各族人民的共同目标和根本利益。因此，信教和不信教的人们可以做到政治上团结合作，信仰上互相尊重。

　　The Chinese government maintains that religious belief is a citizen's personal affair. However, the construction of a prosperous, powerful, democratic modern socialist country with advanced culture, and the safeguarding of the country's sovereignty and national dignity are the common goals and in the fundamental interest of Chinese people of all ethnic groups, including those who believe in a religion and those who do not. Therefore the people who believe in a religion and those who do not can unite and cooperate politically, and respect each other's beliefs.

　　宗教要与其所处的社会相适应，这是宗教存在与发展的普遍规律。中国人民正在建设有中国特色的社会主义现代化国家，中国政府倡导宗教要与之相适应。这种相适应不是要求公民放弃宗教信仰，不是改变宗教的基本教义，而是要求宗教在法律的范围内活动，与社会的发展与文明的进步相适应。这是符合信教群众和各宗教本身的根本利益的。

　　Religion should be adapted to the society in which it is prevalent. This is a universal law for the existence and development of religion. Now the Chinese people are building China into a modern socialist country with Chinese characteristics. The Chinese government advocates that religion should adapt to this reality. However, such adaptation does not require citizens to give up religious belief, nor does it require any religion to change its basic doctrines. Instead, it requires religions to conduct their activities within the sphere prescribed by law and adapt to social and cultural progress. This conforms to the fundamental interests of religious believers as well as to those of the various religions themselves.

　　八十年代以来，中国部分地区出现了一些邪教组织，打着宗教旗号进行违法犯罪活动。邪教组织的为首分子或歪曲宗教教义，制造邪说，蒙骗群众，抗拒国家法律、法令的实施，煽动推翻政府；或利用迷信，装神弄鬼，致人死伤；或聚众淫乱，诈骗钱财，严重危害人民正常的生活和生产秩序。广大人民群众和宗教界人士对此深恶痛绝。中国司法机关对这类严重危害社会和公众利益的违法犯罪分子依法惩处，正是为了维护公众利益和法律尊严，为了更好保护公民宗教信仰自由权利和正常的宗教活动。中国司法机关依法惩治犯罪，与宗教信仰无关，中国没有人因为信仰宗教被惩处。当今世界，任何法治国家都不会容忍这类打着宗教旗号进行违法犯罪活动。

　　Nevertheless, since the 1980s some pernicious organizations have sprung up in certain areas of China, which engage in illegal and even criminal activities under the signboard of religion. Some of the heads of these pseudo-religions distort religious doctrines, create heresies, deceive the masses, refuse to obey the State's laws and decrees, and incite people to overthrow the government. Some pretend to be supernatural beings, and have killed or injured people; others organize promiscuity, or defraud people of money or property. They are a serious danger to the normal life and productive activities of the people. The broad masses of the people and personages of the religious circles detest this phenomenon, and so, in order to safeguard the public interest and the sanctity of the law, and to better protect the people's right to freedom of religious belief and normal religious activities, China's judicial organs punish law-breakers and criminals who severely endanger the society and the public interest in accordance with the law. The punishment of criminals by China's judicial organs in accordance with the law has nothing to do with religious belief. No one in China is punished because of his or her religious belief. But no country that practices the rule of law in the world today would tolerate illegal and criminal activities being carried out under the banner of religion.

宗教信仰自由的司法行政保障和监督

Judicial and Administrative Guarantees and Supervision of the Freedom of Religious Belief

在司法保障方面，中国对侵犯公民宗教信仰自由权利的行为有明确的惩处规定。如《刑法》第二百五十一条规定：“国家机关工作人员非法剥夺公民的宗教信仰自由和侵犯少数民族风俗习惯，情节严重的，处二年以下有期徒刑或者拘役。”人民检察院也在《直接受理的侵犯公民民主权利、人身权利和渎职案件立案标准的决定》中规定，对国家工作人员非法剥夺他人正当的宗教信仰自由，如干涉他人正常的宗教活动或者强迫教徒退教，强迫公民信教或信某一教派，情节恶劣，后果严重，影响很坏的行为，以及非法封闭或捣毁合法宗教场所及其他宗教设施的行为等，应予立案。近年来，中国司法部门依法审理了若干起违反国家有关法律、严重伤害教徒宗教感情的案件，对责任者予以惩处。

　　With respect to judicial guarantee, China stipulates clearly the penalties for the infringement of citizens' right to freedom of religious belief. For instance, Article 251 of the Criminal Law states: "State personnel who unlawfully deprive citizens of their freedom of religious belief and infringe upon the customs and habits of minority ethnic groups, when the circumstances are serious, are to be sentenced to not more than two years of fixed-term imprisonment or criminal detention." In the Decisions on the Standards for Filing Directly Received Cases of Infringement Upon Citizens' Democratic and Personal Rights and Those of Malfeasance, it is stipulated that a people's procuratorate shall place on file a case in which a State functionary illegally deprives anyone of his or her legitimate freedom of religious belief-such as by interfering in normal religious activities, forcing a believer to give up his/her membership of a religion or compelling a citizen to profess a certain religion or adherence to a certain religious sect-and in which the offense is of an abominable nature and has brought about serious consequences and undesirable effects. A people's procuratorate shall also put on record cases of illegally closing or destroying lawful religious sites and other religious facilities. In recent years the Chinese judiciary, in accordance with the law, has tried several cases of infringing upon relevant laws of the State and seriously hurting the religious feelings of certain believers, and has meted out punishments to persons responsible for the offenses.

　　在行政保障方面，中国各级政府设立了宗教事务部门，对有关宗教的法律、法规的贯彻实施进行行政管理和监督，具体落实和执行宗教信仰自由政策。政府宗教事务部门不干涉宗教团体和宗教活动场所的内部事务。

　　With respect to administrative guarantee, governments at different levels have set up religious affairs departments to administer and supervise the implementation of the laws and statutes pertaining to religion and to put the policy ensuring the freedom of religious belief into effect. These departments shall not interfere in the internal affairs of religious organizations and sites.

　　与世界上一些国家一样，中国的宗教团体和宗教活动场所需依法向政府履行登记手续。宗教活动场所申请登记应具备基本的条件：有固定的处所和名称；有经常参加宗教活动的信教公民；有信教公民组成的管理组织；有主持宗教活动的宗教教职人员或符合各宗教规定的人员；有管理规章；有合法的经济收入。对不完全具备设立条件或在管理上存在一些突出问题的宗教活动场所政府部门予以暂缓登记或临时登记。对那些不具备登记条件的，如非法占用土地，违反城市规划法规，私自建立宗教设施的；假冒宗教教职人员擅自设立的；打着宗教的招牌，进行“驱魔赶鬼”等迷信活动的处所等，政府部门则不准予登记。宗教活动场所一经依法登记，便获取合法地位，其合法权益受到保护；遇有侵犯其权益的行为，宗教活动场所管理组织有权向政府有关行政机关申诉，直至向人民法院起诉，寻求行政和法律保护。对基督教教徒按照宗教习惯，在自己家里举行以亲友为主参加的祷告、读经等宗教活动(中国基督教习惯称之为“家庭聚会”)，不要求登记。

　　In China religious organizations and sites for religious activities must register with the government in accordance with the law, which is the case in some other countries as well. Applications for such registration must meet the following basic requirements: a permanent site and name; regular attendance; a management organization composed of adherents to the relevant religion; clerical personnel for officiating religious activities or personnel with qualifications stipulated in regulations of various religions; management regulations and lawful income. Government departments shall defer the registration or only approve temporary registration of religious sites which cannot completely satisfy these basic requirements or have prominent management problems. Government departments shall not permit the registration of, for example, sites for religious activities which illegally occupy land or violate the statutes of city planning, which have been set up without authorization or which promote superstitious activities, such as exorcising evil spirits under the pretext of religious activities. Once a site for religious activities is registered according to law it has legal status and its lawful rights and interests shall be protected. If its rights and interests are infringed upon the organization in charge of the site is entitled to seek administrative and legal protection by appealing to the relevant government organ or taking the case to a people's court. There is no registration requirement for, to quote from Chinese Christians, "house services," which are mainly attended by relatives and friends for religious activities such as praying and Bible reading.

　　作为人民行使权力的机关的中国各级人民代表大会，以及在国家政治生活、社会生活中有重要作用的政治协商会议，对宗教信仰自由政策和法律规定的贯彻执行情况实施监督。在各级人民代表大会、政治协商会议中，有近1.7万名宗教界人士担任代表、委员。他们代表宗教界在人大、政协会议上参与国家大事和社会重要问题的讨论，并就政府涉及宗教的工作提出意见、建议、批评或议案、提案。仅1993年至1996年，国务院宗教事务局办复全国人大代表建议和全国政协提案就达50余件。

　　People's congresses at different levels, which are organs through which the people exercise their power, and the Chinese people's political consultative conferences at different levels, which are playing an important role in the political and social life of the State, shall supervise the implementation of the policy and laws relating to the freedom of religious belief. There are about 17,000 religious personages who are deputies to people's congresses or members of political consultative conferences at different levels. On behalf of religious circles they participate in the discussions of important State and social affairs at the people's congresses and political consultative conferences, and offer comments, suggestions and criticisms, or submit proposals and motions relating to the government's work on religion. During the three years from 1993 to 1996 alone the Religious Affairs Bureau of the State Council heard and responded to more than 50 motions proposed by deputies to the National People's Congress and the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference.

　　对独立自主自办宗教事业的支持

　　 Support for Independence and Initiative in Management of Religious Affairs

　　中国的宗教事业由中国各宗教团体、教职人员和信教群众来办，中国的宗教事务和宗教团体不受外国势力支配。中国政府依照宪法和法律支持中国各宗教独立自主自办的事业。

　　China's religious affairs are handled by the various religious bodies, their clergy and followers themselves. China's religious affairs and religious bodies are not subject to any foreign domination. The Chinese government supports the management of religious affairs by the various religions themselves according to the Constitution and laws.

　　中国宗教实行独立自主自办的方针，是中国人民在反抗殖民主义、帝国主义侵略和奴役的斗争中，由中国宗教信徒自主作出的历史性选择。1840年鸦片战争后，中国逐步沦为半殖民地半封建社会。在这个过程中，西方的基督教和天主教被殖民主义、帝国主义利用，充当了侵略中国的工具，一些西方传教士扮演了不光彩的角色。

　　The principle of independence and taking the initiative in their own hands in the management of churches is a historical choice made by the Chinese religious believers of their own accord as part of the Chinese people's struggle against colonialist and imperialist aggression and enslavement. Following the Opium War of 1840 China declined to a semi-feudal and semi-colonial country. During this process Western Protestantism and Catholicism were used by colonialism and imperialism as a tool for aggression against China, and a number of Western missionaries played an inglorious part in this.

参与贩卖鸦片和策划1840年英国侵略中国的鸦片战争。十九世纪，英国基督教传教士马礼逊和德国传教士郭实腊在东印度公司任职期间，参与向中国贩卖鸦片。一些传教士还竭力主张西方列强用武力强迫清政府开放沿海口岸，声称“只有战争能开放中国给基督”，并直接参与英国侵略中国的军事活动。
They participated in the opium trade and in plotting the Opium War unleashed by Britain against China. In the 19th century Robert Morrison, a British missionary, and Karl Friedrich August Gutz, a German missionary, both working for the East India Company, participated in dumping opium in China. Some missionaries strongly advocated resort to force by Western powers to make the Qing government open its coastal ports, saying that it was only war that could open China to Christianity, and directly participated in the British mititary activities to invade China.

参与1900年八国联军的侵华战争。一批传教士充当了联军的向导、翻译、情报官等，参与屠杀平民，掠夺钱财。美国著名作家马克·吐温说，传教士“从贫困的中国农民身上榨取13倍的罚款，因此让他们、他们的妻子和无辜的孩子们势必慢慢地饿死，而可以把这样获得的杀人代价用于传播福音”。
They participated in the war of 1900 launched by the allied forces of eight powers against China. A number of missionaries, serving as guides, interpreters and information officers, took part in the slaughter of Chinese civilians and the robbing of money and property. According to Mark Twain, the renowned American writer, some of the missionaries imposed on the poor Chinese peasants fines 13 times the amount they were supposed to pay, driving their wives and innocent children to lingering death from starvation, so that they were thus able to use the money gained through such murder to propagate the Gospel.

参与策划、起草对华不平等条约。如1842年中英《南京条约》、1844年中美《望厦条约》、1858年中美和中法《天津条约》、1860年中法《北京条约》等，西方国家一些传教士直接参与了策划、起草。这些不平等条约先后规定，西方天主教、基督教传教士可在贸易港口租地自行建造礼拜堂，受地方官保护，“任传教士在各省租买田地，建造(教堂)自便”，中国地方官“务必厚待保护入内地传教之人”，中国官员不得查禁中国信教之人等。
They directly took part in plotting and drafting unequal treaties, such as the Sino-British Treaty of Nanking of 1842, the Sino-American Treaty of Wanghea of 1844, the Sino-American and Sino-French treaties of Tientsin of 1858 and the Sino-French Convention of Peking of 1860. According to these unequal treaties, Western Catholic and Pretestant missionaries could lease land for building their own places of worship in trade ports and enjoyed the protection of local officials; missionaries could also freely lease or buy land for construction and other purposes in the provinces; local Chinese officials must treat kindly and protect those missionaries who came to inland regions to preach their religions; Chinese officials must not impose prohibitions on Chinese who professed a religious faith; etc.

享有不受中国法律管辖的“治外法权”。西方列强依照领事裁判权对本国在华传教士给予保护。在“治外法权”下，西方一些传教士以帝国主义侵略势力为后盾，深入中国内地建教堂，设教区，霸占田产，欺压官民。这些传教士还肆意将“治外法权”延伸至中国信徒，干涉司法。
They enjoyed extraterritoriality, and were not governed by China's laws. The Western powers gave their missionaries in China protection on the strength of the consular jurisdiction they enjoyed. Taking advantage of extraterritoriality some Western missionaries, backed by the aggressive imperialist forces, went to inland China to build churches and set up parishes. They forcibly occupied land, and bullied and oppressed Chinese officials and civilians. These missionaries even wilfully extended the extraterritoriality to Chinese converts and interfered in Chinese judicial authority.

以“教案”为借口强化西方列强在中国的统治。由于一些西方传教士凭借不平等条约，为非作歹，激起民愤，引发中国民众与西方传教士的冲突与纠纷，史称“教案”。从1840年至1900年，中国各地共发生“教案”400余起。西方国家借口“教案”，向中国政府施加军事或政治压力，提出种种无理要求，强迫赔款，捕杀无辜，甚至以此为口实发动侵略战争。其中，仅1870年“天津教案”，西方列强就强迫清朝官府处死中国民众20人，流放25人。
They strengthened the control of the Western powers over China on the pretext of "religious cases," i.e., conflicts and disputes between Chinese people and the Western missionaries who incurred popular indignation by doing evil deeds under the protection of the unequal treaties. In the period between 1840 and 1900, some 400 such cases occurred in China. On the pretext of these religious cases the Western powers imposed military and political pressure on the Chinese government. They put forward various unreasonable demands, compelled the Chinese government to pay indemnities, and arrested and executed innocent people. Moreover, they even launched aggressive wars on such a pretext. In a case in Tianjin in 1870 alone, the Western powers compelled the Qing government to execute 20 people and exile 25.

阻挠和反对中国的反法西斯斗争和人民革命。日本侵占中国东北后，罗马教廷率先公开承认日本扶植的伪“满洲国”，派驻“宗座代表”，采取实际上支持日本侵略中国的立场。抗战胜利后，一些西方传教士煽动宗教徒仇视人民革命，甚至组织武装帮助国民党打内战。
They obstructed and opposed China's struggle against fascism and the Chinese people's revolution. After Japan invaded Northeast China the Vatican took a stand which was, in fact, supporting the Japanese aggression. It took the lead in recognizing the puppet Manchukuo regime set up by the Japanese and sent a representative there. After the victory in the War of Resistance Against Japan some Western missionaries stirred up hostility against the people's revolution among the converts and even organized armed forces to help the Kuomintang fight in the civil war.      

敌视新中国，策划破坏活动。新中国成立后，罗马教廷数次发出“通谕”，煽动教徒敌视新生的人民政权。
They adopted a hostile attitude toward New China and plotted sabotage. After the founding of New China in 1949 the Vatican issued papal encyclicals several times instigating hatred against the new people's political power among the converts.

　　西方天主教、基督教在中国近代史上被利用来充当这些不光彩角色的同时，还操纵、控制中国教会，使中国教会变成西方修会、差会的附庸。中国籍神职、教牧人员和广大教徒处于无权地位。二十世纪四十年代，中国天主教20个总主教中，外国籍占17人，中国籍仅3人；在143个教区中，外国籍主教有110多人，中国籍主教只有20余人。

　　While playing an inglorious role in modern Chinese history, Western Catholicism and Protestantism manipulated and controlled Chinese churches turning them into the appendages to Western religious orders and mission societies. Under these circumstances Chinese clergymen and the vast majority of their followers had no rights. In the 1940s among the 20 archbishops in China there were 17 foreigners and only three Chinese; in the 143 parishes there were some 110 foreign bishops but only about 20 Chinese bishops.

　　中国基督教界早有人提出摆脱外国教士控制的主张，并开始从事中国基督教自立组织的活动。但在半殖民地半封建的旧中国，中国教会真正实现独立自主自办是根本不可能的。

　　Some Chinese Christians early on expressed their wish to cast off such control and began establishing their own independent Christian organizations. However, in the semi-colonial and semi-feudal old China it was absolutely impossible for Chinese churches to maintain real independence and realize self-management.

　　1949年，中华人民共和国成立，结束了半殖民地半封建社会的历史，从而为中国天主教和基督教实现独立自主自办提供了历史条件。1950年7月，吴耀宗等40位各教派负责人，发表《中国基督教在新中国建设中努力的途径》的“三自宣言”，表明了中国基督徒拥护新中国，摆脱帝国主义势力控制，实现中国教会自治、自养、自传。1950年9月，1527位基督教负责人签名拥护“三自宣言”。尔后的三四年间，在这个文件上签名的基督徒达40多万人，占当时全国基督徒的三分之二。自此，中国基督教走上了“三自”道路。

　　The founding of the People's Republic of China put an end to the era of semi-colonial and semi-feudal society in China, thus providing the historical conditions for Chinese Catholicism and Protestantism to become independent and self-managing. In July 1950, 40 leading figures from various religious denominations headed by Wu Yaozong published the "Three-Self Declaration" titled "The Way in Which the Chinese Christianity Works for New China's Construction", expressing the attitude of Chinese Christians who supported New China, and their determination to cast off imperialist influence and achieve the "Three Selfs" (self-administration, self-support and self-propagation) of Chinese churches. In September 1950, 1,527 leading Christians signed the declaration. Three or four years later the number of Christians who had signed the document reached more than 400,000, about two-thirds of the total number of Christians in the country. Christians have since then adhered to the principles of the "Three Selfs".

　　1950年11月，四川广元县500多名天主教徒发表了“天主教自立革新运动宣言”，主张割断与帝国主义者各方面的关系，建立自治、自传、自养的新教会。这一宣言得到全国天主教神长教友的响应。尽管梵蒂冈一再采取敌视新中国的政治行动，中国天主教仍在1957年、1958年先后将选出的一名代理主教和两名主教报梵蒂冈。然而，梵蒂冈竟以“超级绝罚”相威胁，极大地伤害了中国天主教徒的感情，中国天主教从此坚定地走上了自选自圣主教、独立自主自办教会的道路。在信仰上，中国天主教与世界各地的天主教是一致的；在教会管理上，一切内部事务均由中国天主教教会自主决定。

　　In November 1950 more than 500 Catholics in Guangyuan County, Sichuan, published the Declaration on the Catholic Reform Movement of Self-Support, advocating cutting off the relationship with imperialism in all aspects and setting up new churches on the basis of self-administration, self-support and self-propagation. The declaration was welcomed by the leading Catholic clergymen and other converts in all parts of China. Though the Vatican took repeated political actions of hostility against New China, the Chinese church reported the appointment of one acting bishop and two full bishops, selected in 1957 and 1958, to the Vatican. However, the Vatican refused to recognize them threatening to mete out extraordinary punishments, greatly hurting the feelings of the Chinese Catholics. Since then the Chinese Catholic church has firmly taken the way of selecting and ordaining its own bishops and independently managing the churches. In religious belief Chinese Catholicism is the same as Catholicisms anywhere else in the world, while in church administration all the internal affairs are handled according to decisions made by the Chinese Catholic church independently.

　　几十年来，中国基督教、天主教坚持独立自主自办方针，得到了广大信教群众的认同和支持，也使教会和宗教活动有了健康发展。目前，中国基督教信徒总数是1949年的14倍。中国天主教115个教区，均由中国主教或教区长主持教会工作。

　　In the past few decades the Chinese Protestantism and Catholicism have stuck to the principle of independence and self-management, which has met with assent and support from the vast majority of believers and enabled the church and its religious activities to develop soundly. Now the total number of Chinese Christians is 14 times as many as in 1949. Chinese Catholicism has 115 parishes under the direction of Chinese bishops or priests.

　　中国的宗教坚持独立自主自办，同时在平等友好的基础上积极与世界各国宗教组织进行交往和联系。对同中国友好，尊重中国主权，尊重中国宗教独立自主自办事业的外国宗教组织和个人，中国的大门始终是敞开的。中国基督教和天主教与世界上许多国家教会建立了友好往来关系。1991年2月，中国基督教协会正式加入“世界基督教教会联合会”。中国天主教还先后派代表出席了“第五届‘宗教与和平’国际会议”和“世界天主教青年大会”等一些国际宗教会议。近年来，中国教会向国外选派了相当数量的留学生，并聘请外国教师和学者到国内的神学院校讲学。中国佛教、道教和伊斯兰教的国际友好交往也日益扩大。

　　While adhering to the principle of independence and self-administration, Chinese religions are active in making exchanges and contacts with their counterparts all over the world on the basis of equality and friendship. China is always open to foreign religious organizations and individuals who are friendly to China, respect China's sovereignty and Chinese religions' principle of independence and self-administration. China's Protestantism and Catholicism have maintained friendly contacts with churches in many countries. In February 1991 the China Christian Council officially joined the World Council of Churches. The Chinese Catholic Church has sent representatives to attend some international religious conferences successively, such as the Fifth World Conference on Religion and Peace and the World Catholic Youth Day. In recent years Chinese churches have sent quite a number of students to study abroad and invited foreign lecturers and scholars to teach in China's theological seminaries. Friendly international exchanges are also increasing in the areas of China's Buddhism, Taoism and Islam.

　　中国政府一贯坚持独立自主的和平外交政策，愿意改善同梵蒂冈的关系。但必须符合两个基本条件：第一，梵蒂冈必须断绝同台湾的所谓“外交关系”，承认中华人民共和国政府是中国唯一合法政府，台湾是中国领土不可分割的一部分；第二，梵蒂冈不得以宗教事务为名干涉中国的内部事务。中国和梵蒂冈的关系首先是国家关系，只有在国家关系改善后才能谈宗教问题。无论中国和梵蒂冈的关系是否改善，中国政府都将一如既往地支持中国天主教高举爱国主义旗帜，坚持独立自主自办教会方针和自选自圣主教。

　　The Chinese government has consistently adhered to a peaceful foreign policy of independence and taking initiative in its own hands, and is willing to improve the relations with the Vatican. However, such improvement requires two basic conditions: First, the Vatican must end its so-called diplomatic relations with Taiwan and recognize that the government of the People's Republic of China is the only legal government in China and that Taiwan is an inalienable part of China's territory. Second, the Vatican must not interfere in China's internal affairs on the pretext of religious affairs. In the first place, the relationship between China and the Vatican is one between two countries. Therefore, only when the relations between the two countries improve can religious issues be discussed. Whether the relations between China and the Vatican change or not, the Chinese government will, as always, support Chinese Catholicism which holds aloft the banner of patriotism, sticks to the principle of independence and self-management, and stands for selection and ordination of bishops by itself.

　　对少数民族宗教信仰自由权利的保护

　　 Protection of the Right to Freedom of Religious Belief for Ethnic Minorities

　　中国是一个统一的多民族国家。中国政府执行各民族平等、团结、互助的民族政策，尊重和保护少数民族宗教信仰自由的权利和风俗习惯。《中华人民共和国民族区域自治法》规定：“民族自治地方的自治机关保障各民族公民有宗教信仰自由。”

　　China is a united country of many ethnic groups. The Chinese government pursues a policy of equality, unity and mutual assistance among all the ethnic groups, respects and protects the right to freedom of religious belief and the folk customs of the ethnic minorities. The Law of the People's Republic of China on National Regional Autonomy stipulates: "Organs of self-government in ethnic regional autonomous areas protect the right to freedom of religious belief of the citizens of all ethnic groups."

　　中国政府在致力于促进少数民族地区经济、文化、教育等各项事业的进步，提高包括信教群众在内的广大少数民族群众物质文化生活水平的同时，特别注意尊重少数民族的宗教信仰，保护少数民族文化遗产。对各民族包括宗教文化在内的文化遗产和民间艺术进行普查、收集、整理、研究和出版。国家投入大量资金用于维修少数民族地区具有重要历史、文化价值的寺庙和宗教设施。

　　While making great efforts to promote progress in economy, culture, education and other undertakings in the areas where ethnic minorities live in compact communities, so as to improve the material and cultural well-being of the broad masses of the ethnic minorities (including believers in various religions), the Chinese government pays special attention to their religious beliefs and the protection of their cultural heritages. Special programs have been carried out to survey, collect, classify, study and publish the cultural heritages-including religious cultures-and folk arts of all the ethnic groups. In addition, the State has made huge investments in the maintenance and reconstruction of temples, mosques and other religious facilities of important historical and cultural value in ethnic-minority areas.

　　西藏是中国的一个民族区域自治地方。藏族多数群众信奉藏语系佛教。1951年和平解放以来，特别是改革开放以来，公民的宗教信仰自由权利在西藏得到了充分的贯彻落实。自八十年代以来，中央政府对西藏专项拨款2亿多元人民币，用于维修、修复著名的布达拉宫、大昭寺、札什伦布寺、桑耶寺等寺庙。国家还专门拨款，支持佛教界整理出版了藏文《大藏经》等重要藏语系佛教典籍，还支持佛教界在北京和拉萨分别开办了中国藏语系高级佛学院和西藏佛学院。

　　Tibet is one of China's ethnic autonomous regions, and the Tibetans mostly believe in Tibetan Buddhism. Since the peaceful liberation of Tibet in 1951, and particularly since the introduction of the reform and opening policies in 1979, citizens' right to freedom of religious belief has been thoroughly carried out in Tibet. Since the 1980s the central government has allocated more than 200 million yuan in special funds for the maintenance and reconstruction of the famous Potala Palace and the Jokhang, Tashilhunpo and Samye monasteries. The State has also established special funds to support the work of compiling and publishing the Tripitaka in the Tibetan language and other major Tibetan Buddhist classics as well as the work of establishing the Advanced Buddhism College of Tibetan Language Family of China in Beijing and the Tibet College of Buddhism in Lhasa.

　　目前，西藏有1700多处佛教活动场所，住寺僧尼4.6万多人。信教者家中几乎都设有小经堂或佛龛，每年到拉萨朝佛敬香的信教群众达百万人以上。西藏处处可见从事佛事活动的信教群众，到处悬挂着经幡，堆积着刻有佛教经文的麻尼堆。一年一度的雪顿节中的宗教活动及传统的马年转冈仁波钦、羊年转纳木错湖等宗教活动，都得以正常进行并受到社会各方面的尊重。

　　At present, there are in Tibet over 1,700 places for Buddhist activities and a total of 46,000 resident monks and nuns. Small prayer halls or shrines are virtually universal in the homes of believers, and pilgrims coming to Lhasa number well over one million each year. Believers performing Buddhist rituals, and prayer umbrellas and Mani rocks carved with Buddhist sutras can be found all over the Tibet Autonomous Region. In addition, religious activities during the annual Sholton Festival and the traditional practice of circling Mount Kangrinboqe in the Year of the Horse and circling Lake Namco in the Year of the Sheep along pilgrim paths have been carried on and respected by society at large.

　　活佛转世是藏语系佛教特有的传承方式，得到了国家的承认和尊重。1992年，国务院宗教事务局批准了第十七世噶玛巴活佛的继任。1995年，中国严格按照宗教仪轨和历史定制，经过金瓶掣签，报国务院批准，完成了十世班禅转世灵童寻访、认定以及第十一世班禅的册立和坐床。这些举措充分反映了藏族群众宗教信仰自由权利受到尊重和保护，得到了西藏广大信教群众的拥护和支持。

　　The reincarnation of holy men, or "Living Buddhas," is a unique form of succession in Tibetan Buddhism which has long been recognized and respected by the State. In 1992 the Religious Affairs Bureau of the State Council approved the succession of the 17th Karmapa Living Buddha. In 1995 China successfully concluded the search for and identification of the reincarnation of the 10th Panchen Lama and the title-conferring and enthronement of the 11th Panchen Lama after lot-drawing from a golden urn according to the established religious rituals and historical conventions of Tibetan Buddhism, and with the approval of the State Council. These actions highlight the fact that the Tibetan people's right to religious freedom is respected and protected, thus winning endorsement and support from the converts of Tibet.

　　鉴于历史上的藏语系佛教大活佛在西藏社会生活中的特殊地位，中国的明代、清代逐步将活佛转世纳入了中央政府管理和国家典章法制范围内。1792年，清朝政府颁布法令，对呼图克图以上大活佛实行“金瓶掣签”，之后形成历史定制，并固定为藏语系佛教的宗教仪轨。经“金瓶掣签”认定的活佛转世灵童须报请中央政府批准后，方能正式继位。少数情况特殊者也需报请中央政府批准后方可免予掣签。“金瓶掣签”既坚持了中央政府的最高权威，维护了国家主权，又在宗教上体现了释迦牟尼的“法断”。从1792年至本世纪，在藏语系佛教大活佛转世系统中，有70多位转世灵童是经过“金瓶掣签”认定后报中央政府批准的。因此，大活佛转世经由中央政府批准，是藏语系佛教宗教仪轨和历史定制，是维护藏语系佛教正常秩序的关键。

　　Considering the special place of the Grand Living Buddhas in Tibetan Buddhism of past generations in Tibetan social life, the Ming (1368-1644) and Qing (1644-1911) dynasties gradually put the identifying of the reincarnation of the Living Buddhas within the jurisdiction of the central government and into the framework of the State's laws and statutes. In 1792 the Qing government issued an order that the reincarnation of the Grand Living Buddhas above the Hutuktu rank be determined through drawing lots from the golden urn, which later developed into a historical institution and was accepted as a permanent religious ritual in Tibetan Buddhism. The "soul boy" confirmed through lot-drawing from the golden urn as the reincarnation of a Grand Living Buddha must be reported to the central government for approval prior to his official enthronement. The lot-drawing may be dispensed with under special circumstances, but this must also be reported to the central government in advance for approval. The practice of lot-drawing from the golden urn not only upholds the central government's supreme authority and the sovereignty of the State, but religiously displays the "decision by Sakyamuni's Dharma" as well. Since 1792, in the reincarnation system of the Grand Living Buddhas of Tibetan Buddhism over 70 "soul boys" have been identified by confirmation through lot-drawing from the golden urn and with the approval of the central government. Therefore, the approval of the reincarnation of the Grand Living Buddhas by the central government is a religious ritual and historical convention of Tibetan Buddhism, and is the key to safeguarding the normal order of Tibetan Buddhism.

中国政府尊重和保护穆斯林群众的宗教信仰自由和风俗习惯。
The Chinese government also respects and protects the Moslems' freedom of religious belief as well as their folk customs. 
对穆斯林的朝觐，政府有关部门提供了各种服务，受到穆斯林的称赞。
The departments concerned in the government have provided special pilgrimage-related services for Moslem pilgrims, to the acclaim of the latter. 
八十年代以来，中国赴麦加朝觐的穆斯林有4万多人。在新疆，现有清真寺达2.3万多座，宗教教职人员2.9万人，满足了信教群众过宗教生活的需要。中国政府也十分尊重信奉伊斯兰教的少数民族的饮食习惯和丧葬仪式，制定生产清真食品的法规，开辟穆斯林公墓。近年来，中国司法机关依法审理了有关出版物严重伤害穆斯林宗教感情的案件，维护了穆斯林的合法权益。
Since the 1980s the number of Chinese Moslems going to Mecca on pilgrimages has exceeded 40,000. In the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region alone, there are now more than 23,000 mosques, with 29,000 clergymen, having thus met the needs of believers' religious life. Out of full consideration for the dietary habits and funeral rites of those ethnic-minority people who believe in Islam, the Chinese government has enacted regulations on the production of halal food and opened Moslems-only cemeteries. In recent years Chinese judicial organs have provided legal protection for the lawful rights of the Moslems. Some cases concerning publications badly hurting the religious feelings of the Moslems have been handled according to law.

中国政府坚决反对利用宗教狂热来分裂人民、分裂国家、破坏各民族之间团结的民族分裂主义，坚决反对利用宗教进行的非法活动和恐怖主义活动，坚决维护国家统一和少数民族地区的社会稳定，保护少数民族信教群众正常的宗教活动。
The Chinese government resolutely opposes attempts to split the country along ethnic lines, and any use of religious fanaticism to divide the people, split the country or harm the unity among all ethnic groups or engage in illegal activities and terrorist actions under the signboard of religion. Meanwhile, the Chinese government firmly upholds national unity and social stability in areas where ethnic minorities live in compact communities, and safeguards the normal religious activities of the ethnic-minority believers.

中国政府尊重国际社会在宗教信仰领域公认的原则，认为这些原则必须与各国具体情况相结合，并通过各国的国内法律来实施。中国政府反对在宗教领域搞对抗，反对利用宗教干涉别国内政。
The Chinese government respects the generally accepted principles regarding religious faiths in the international community, and holds that these principles must be applied in accordance with the concrete conditions and be carried out according to the domestic law of each country. The Chinese government opposes creating confrontations in religion or interfering in the internal affairs of another country under the pretext of religion.

事实充分证明，新中国成立以来，特别是改革开放近二十年来，中国人民的人权状况得到了极大的改善，宗教信仰自由的权利也得到充分的尊重和保护。中国政府将一如既往地在维护人权包括保护宗教信仰自由方面作出更大的努力。
The facts make it fully clear that remarkable improvements have been achieved in the situation of human rights of the Chinese people, and the freedom of religious belief has enjoyed full respect and legal protection since the founding of New China, particularly in the recent two decades following the implementation of reform and opening policies. The Chinese government will, as always, make ever-greater efforts to safeguard human rights and specifically to protect the freedom of religious belief.

关于中美贸易平衡问题
On Sino-US Trade Balance 

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China

一九九七年三月·北京
March 1997, Beijing 
 
目　录 
Contents

迅速发展的中美贸易
Soaring Trade Between China and the United States

关于中美贸易平衡的统计问题
Statistical Difference in Sino-US Trade Balance

按原产地统计难以真实反映中美贸易平衡状况
Statistics Based on Rules of Origin Cannot Accurately Reflect the Situation of Sino-US Trade Balance

美国对中国出口管制是双边贸易平衡的主要障碍
US Export Control Against China -- a Major Obstacle for Bilateral Trade Balance

中美经济贸易合作有着广阔前景
Sino-US Economic and Trade Co-operation Shows Vast Vistas


发展中美经贸关系符合两国人民的根本利益。
Developing Sino-US economic and trade relations serves the fundamental interests of both peoples. 
中美建交以来，两国经济贸易关系发展迅速，呈现出比较强的互补性和互利性，也不时出现一些摩擦和分歧。
Following the establishment of diplo"imatic relations between the People's Republic of China and the United States, bilateral economic and trade ties have grown fast, featuring complement and mutual benefit. Occasionally, however, frictions and differences took place. 
当前，美国方面所过分强调甚至渲染的中美贸易平衡问题，已经影响两国经贸关系的健康发展，也引起有关国家和地区的关注。基于发展中美关系和推动两国贸易的愿望，我们认为有必要就这一问题阐述中国政府的立场和观点。
At present, the issue of bilateral trade balance -- much too stressed and even exaggerated by the United States -- has hindered the healthy development of economic and trade relations between the two countries. It has also caused concerns among relevant countries and regions. In our bid to develop Sino-US relations and promote bilateral trade, we think it necessary to make clear the position and viewpoints of the Chinese Government on the issue.

迅速发展的中美贸易
Soaring Trade Between China and the United States

1979年1月，中美两国正式建立外交关系。同年7月，两国政府签订《中美贸易关系协定》，相互给予最惠国待遇。中美经济贸易从此进入迅速发展时期。据中国方面的统计，1979年中美贸易额为24.5亿美元，1996年达到428.4亿美元，18年累计2606亿美元；从1979年起，美国成为中国第三大贸易伙伴，1996年成为第二大贸易伙伴。据美国方面的统计，1979年双边贸易额为23.7亿美元，1996年达到635亿美元，18年累计3760亿美元；1980年中国是美国第二十四位贸易伙伴，1995年上升为第五位。尽管两国的统计数据不尽相同，但双方的贸易统计都表明，在过去18年中，两国贸易年均增长18%以上。这是中美经济贸易发展的主流。
In January 1979, the People's Republic of China and the United States established formal diplomatic relations. Six months later, the governments of the two countries signed the "Agreement on Trade Relations Between the People's Republic of China and the United States of America" granting each other the most-favoured-nation trading status. Since then, Sino-US trade and economic relations entered a period of fast growth. According to Chinese statistics, Sino-US trade volume was 2.45 billion US dollars in 1979 but rocketed to 42.84 billion US dollars in 1996, with an accumulative volume of 260.6 billion US dollars over the past 18 years. The United States became China's third largest trade partner in 1979, and rose to the second place in 1996. According to US statistics, bilateral trade was 2.37 billion US dollars in 1979 and topped 63.5 billion US dollars in 1996, totalling 376 billion US dollars in the past 18 years. Among trade partners of the United States, China ranked the 24th in 1980 and claimed the fifth place in 1995. Despite statistical discrepancies, trade figures of the two sides both suggested an average annual bilateral trade growth rate of more than 18% over the last 18 years. This has been the mainstream in the development of Sino-US economic and trade relations.

　　1996年，按各自的统计，中国自美国的进口占中国进口总额的11.6%，美国自中国的进口占美国进口总额的5.42%。美国是中国出口增长最快的市场之一，中国也是美国出口增长最快的市场之一。从1990年至1996年，美国对华出口额，双方统计都是年均增长16%以上，大大高于同期美国出口增长速度，居美国对各国出口增长速度的前列。中美两国贸易迅速增长的根本原因，在于两国资源条件、经济结构、产业结构以及消费水平存在着较大差异，经济具有互补性。中国是发展中国家，劳动成本低，但资金短缺，科技相对落后。美国是经济发达国家，资本充足，科技发达，但劳动成本高。中国主要向美国出口纺织品、服装、鞋、玩具、家用电器和旅行箱包等劳动密集型产品。美国主要向中国出口飞机、动力设备、机械设备、电子器件、通讯设备和化工等资本技术密集型产品，以及粮食、棉花等农产品。贸易产品结构的互补性和互利性，有力地推动了两国贸易的发展。

      Chinese statistics indicate that, in 1996, US products accounted for 11.6% of China's total imports, while US statistics show 5.42% of its imports last year came from China. The United States is one of the fastest growing markets for Chinese exports while China is also one of the fastest growing markets for US exports. Both countries' statistics suggest that between 1990 and 1996, US exports to China grew by more than 16% a year on average, far exceeding the overall US export growth in the period. China is one of its trade partners with which the United States scored the highest export growth. This is mainly attributable to the marked differences in the two countries' resources, economic structures, industrial setup and consumption levels, and to the fact that their economies can be complementary to each other. China is a developing country with low labour costs, but suffers from capital constraint and relatively under-developed scientific and technological development. The United States is a developed country with abundant capital and highly advanced technologies, but suffers from high labour costs. China mainly sells to the United States labour-intensive products such as textiles, garments, shoes, toys, electric home appliances and luggage. The United States mainly sells to China capital- and technology-intensive products such as aircraft, power generation equipment, machinery, electronics, telecommunications equipment and chemical machinery, as well as agricultural products including grain and cotton. So complementary and mutually beneficial is the structure of their exchanges of goods that it has greatly pushed the development of bilateral trade.

关于中美贸易平衡的统计问题
Statistical Difference in Sino-US Trade Balance

近年来，双边贸易的平衡问题，特别是美国方面所说的对华贸易巨额逆差问题，引起人们的关注。统计分析表明，近年来美国对华贸易逆差是事实，但美国方面显然把逆差的程度严重地夸大了。
In recent years, bilateral trade balance, particularly huge US trade deficit from its trade with China as claimed by the US side, has roused extensive attention. Statistics and analyses prove it true that Sino-US trade has been in favour of China in recent years, but it is obvious that the size of the US de cit has been largely exaggerated by the US side.

美国方面的统计显示，在中美贸易中，1979年至1982年美国为顺差，1983年开始出现逆差，1996年贸易逆差达到395亿美元。中国方面的统计则表明，在从1979年到1992年的14年里，中方一直为逆差，自1993年转为顺差，1996年顺差为105亿美元。显然，中美两国关于双边贸易平衡状况的统计存在着明显的差异（见表一）。
Statistics from the US side indicate that Sino-US trade had been in favour of the US side during the 1979-82 period, but the United States started suering from decit in 1983 and the gure amounted to 39.5 billion US dollars in 1996. Chinese statistics, however, indicate that China had suered from decit in the bilateral trade during the 14 years between 1979 and 1992. Surplus rst appeared in 1993 and the figure rose to 10.5 billion US dollars in 1996. Obviously, there exists remarkable difference between China and the United States in their estimation of bilateral trade balance situation (see Table 1).

　　为了弄清楚中美两国贸易统计差异过大及美国贸易统计反映的对华贸易逆差过大的原因，1994年，美方同意中方倡议，在中美商贸联委会下成立双边贸易统计小组，进行专题研究。美方成员由美国商务部普查局的专家组成，中方成员由中国外经贸部和海关总署的专家组成。双方专家经过一年多时间的努力，比较了中国、美国和香港地区1992年和1993年的贸易统计数据，处理了几十万条记录，整理了几百套分析表，根据翔实的数据形成了《中美商贸联委会贸易和投资工作组贸易统计小组工作报告》。报告认为，美方统计的对华贸易逆差至少在以下几个方面被高估了：

      To diagnose the large difference in the bilateral trade statistics by China and the United States and the large US trade deficit against China under US statistics, the US side agreed to a proposal made by China in 1994 on establishing a bilateral trade statistics expert group under the Sino-US Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade to undertake special studies of the subject. US members in the group were composed of experts from the Census Bureau of the Department of Commerce of the United States, while Chinese members in the group were experts from the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Co-operation and the General Administration of Customs. The experts from both sides completed the work report of the Trade Statistics Subgroup of the Trade and Investment Working Group of the Sino-US Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade on the basis of abundant facts after they spent more than one year comparing 1992 and 1993 statistical data from China, the United States and the Hong Kong region, processing several hundred thousand records, sorting out several hundred analysis tables. The report believed that the US statistics had over-estimated at least the following factors in producing the large trade deficit against China:

　　第一，美方的进口统计，因忽视转口和转口增加值而高估了从中国的进口。中美两国贸易的很大一部分是经第三方转口的。据中方统计，中国对美出口的60%是经过以香港地区为主的第三方转口的。据美方资料分析，中国的货物只有20%直接运往美国，其余80%是通过第三方转口到美国的。货物离开中国后在第三方增加的价值，显然不应计算为中国的出口。中美商贸联委会贸易统计小组分析的结论是，这两年中国出口货物经香港转口到美国的平均增值率高达40.7%，远高于一般情况下的转口增值率。一些主要转口货物，如玩具和针织服装等，增值率甚至超过100%。1992年和1993年香港向美国转口中国内地产品的增加值分别为52.3亿美元和63亿美元。美方将香港转口增加值也统计成自中国的进口，从而大大高估了从中国的进口值。

      First, the US import statistics has ignored entrepot trade and value added from entrepot trade to over-estimate its imports from China. A large part of Sino-US trade is conducted through entrepot trade via a third place. Under Chinese statistics, 60% of Chinese exports to the United States are conducted through entrepot trade via a third place, mainly the Hong Kong region. According to US information, only 20% of Chinese goods are directly shipped to the United States, while the remaining 80% get into the United States through a third place. It is obvious that the added value created at the third place after the goods have left China shall not be calculated as exports from China. The conclusion of the Trade Statistics Subgroup of the Trade and Investment Working Group of the Sino-US Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade was: The average rate of value-adding of Chinese exports to the United States via the Hong Kong region was 40.7% in the past two years, which was far above the re-export value-adding rate under general circumstances. The value adding rate of some of the major re-exported commodities, such as toys and knitwear, even exceeded 100%. Chinese mainland products acquired an added value of 5.23 billion US dollars in 1992 and 6.3 billion US dollars in 1993 at Hong Kong before they were re-exported to the United States. The US side, however, calculated the added value created in Hong Kong region's entrepot trade as imports from China, and thus greatly over-calculated its import value from China.

　　第二，美方的出口统计，因忽视转口而低估了对中国的出口。根据中美商贸联委会专家的分析，美国对中国的出口统计中，经香港对中国的转口只占香港方面统计的四分之一左右。1992年和1993年经香港转口的美国对中国出口额分别约有18亿美元和23亿美元未被计入美国对华出口总额中。

      Secondly, the US statistics of its exports to China has been under-estimated by neglecting re-exports. According to analyses by experts of the Sino-US Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade, the amount of re-exports to China via the Hong Kong region included in the US statistics of its exports to China was only about a quarter of that included in Hong Kong's statistics. In 1992 and 1993 respectively, about 1.8 billion US dollars and 2.3 billion US dollars worth of US exports to China, through entrepot trade via Hong Kong, were not included in the US statistics of its exports to China.

　　第三，美国确定货物原产地所采用的方法，导致双方统计上的差异。对一般进口货物原产地的判定，通常是根据进口商的申报。被判定原产地为中国的货物被记录为来自中国的进口，无论是否实际上由中间方出口，或者货物在中间方是否有增加值。某些被美国记录成自中国的进口，很有可能是应该记录为自其它中间方进口的。双方专家认识到，需要进一步对原产地的判定问题进行研究。

      Thirdly, the US method in determining the origin of goods also leads to the discrepancies in the statistics of the two sides. The judgment of the origin of ordinary imported goods is usually based on the declaration by importers. Goods determined as originating in China are recorded as imports from China, regardless of whether they are actually exports via a third place or whether the goods have acquired added value in that third place. Some imports which have been recorded by the United States as imports from China should, most probably, be recorded as imports from other third countries or regions. Experts of both sides acknowledged that further studies are needed on the issue of determination of origin.

　　不考虑按原产地原则统计带来的误差，仅因忽视转口和转口增加值这一因素，美国1992年和1993年统计的对华贸易逆差分别被高估大约70亿美元和86亿美元，即美国当年公布的对华逆差平均被夸大了60%以上（见表二）。

      Leaving aside the error caused by the rules of origin, the US statistics over-estimated trade deficit against China by 7 billion US dollars in 1992 and 8.6 billion US dollars in 1993, or the published US trade deficits against China in these two years were exaggerated by more than 60% (see Table 2), merely through neglecting entrepot trade and value added from entrepot trade alone.

　　此外，美国因出口统计不完全而低估了对中国的出口值。1996年12月5日，美国商务部普查局官员在美国《商业日报》上指出，由于出口不像进口那样能够通过征税为政府带来直接收入，所以美国出口统计可能漏掉了10%以上的记录。据此推算，1992年和1993年美国对华出口统计可能分别漏掉10亿美元以上。

      In addition, the United States has also under-estimated its export value to China because of its incomplete export statistics. On December 5, 1996, officials with the Census Bureau of the US Department of Commerce pointed out in the Business Journal that at least 10% of US exports might have been overlooked in statistics because exports, unlike imports, are not taxed and do not bring the government any direct revenue. According to such estimate, at least 1 billion US dollars of US exports to China might have been left out in the US statistics in 1992 and 1993 respectively.

　　考虑到上述因素，1992年和1993年美方对华贸易逆差分别高估了约80亿美元和96亿美元，即平均高估70%左右。贸易统计小组只负责调查分析中美双方公布的贸易统计之间的差异，双方的贸易统计方法并没有进行相应的调整，美方对华贸易逆差高估的格局至今也没有实质性的改变。如按上述比例测算，1996年美方公布的对华贸易逆差被高估了160亿美元左右。

      Considering the aforementioned factors, the US trade deficit against China was over-estimated by 8 billion US dollars in 1992 and 9.6 billion US dollars in 1993, and that represents an average over-estimation rate of about 70%. The trade statistics expert group was only in charge of investigating and analyzing the difference between the trade statistics published by China and the United States. The trade statistics methods adopted by the two sides have not been correspondingly adjusted, and the US side's over-estimation of its trade deficit against China has not since changed substantially. Calculated by the aforesaid rate, the 1996 US trade deficit against China, as published by the US side, was over-estimated by an amount of some 16 billion US dollars.

　　近年来，美方统计的所谓对华巨额贸易逆差，其原因是多方面的。既有统计技术方法上的缺陷，也有美国对华政策方面的因素。因此，依据美方的贸易统计来评价两国间的贸易平衡状况是远远不够的。从根本上说，美国对外贸易的长期逆差，是由自身深层次经济因素决定的，不应把责任归咎于其它国家。

      The so-called enormous trade deficit against China under the US statistics in recent years is attributable to a variety of factors, including flaws in statistical techniques and methods as well as the US policies to China. Therefore, it is far from being sufficient to evaluate the two nations' trade balance situation only on the basis of the trade statistics of the US side. Fundamentally, the protracted US trade deficit against other countries is determined by its own deep-rooted economic factors. It should not shift the blame upon other countries.

按原产地统计难以真实反映中美贸易平衡状况

Statistics Based on Rules of Origin Cannots Accurately Reflect the Situation of Sino-US Trade Balance

　　目前，中美双方对外贸易统计都是按照原产地原则进行的。越来越多的国际经济学家和统计学家认为，目前国际通行的这种统计原则，存在着不合理性，特别是对于转口贸易和加工贸易的统计，往往存在较大误差。这是美国对华贸易逆差被严重夸大、中美贸易平衡状况被扭曲的实质所在。

      Currently, both China and the United States calculate their external trade according to the principle of origin of goods. A growing number of international economists and statisticians believe, however, that there are irrationalities in this currently widely-used international statistical principle, especially because big errors might occur when it is applied to calculating entrepot trade and processing trade. Here lies the essence of the matter when the United States seriously exaggerates its trade deficit against China and distorts bilateral trade balance.

　　原产地统计是指进口货物的国别要按其原产地，即商品的生产地、制造地或发生实质性改变的加工地进行统计。虽然原产地原则作为各国实施贸易管理的工具，在世界贸易发展历史上发挥过重要作用，至今在国际多边贸易协定的执行和各国贸易政策措施的实施中仍然被广泛应用，但对如何判定货物是否发生“实质性的改变”，至今没有统一的实施细则。1973年，海关合作理事会制定《关于简化和协调海关手续的国际公约》，其中有一个关于原产地规则的附约，但也只是原则性的规定，没有可操作的规则。关贸总协定乌拉圭回合谈判制定了《原产地规则协议》，确定了协调各国非特惠制原产地规则的原则，并委托世界海关组织承担协调规则技术标准的制订工作，但至今仍未完成。由于缺乏国际统一的原产地规则，各国在制订自己的原产地规则时，往往从本国需要出发，标准不一，宽严各异，在判定进口货物原产地时往往存在随意性。

      Statistics by origin refers to the determination of the source of the imports as the place where they were grown, manufactured or processed to make substantial changes. As a tool for countries to exercise trade management, the rules of origin have been important in the history of world trade. Today it is still widely applied to executing multinational trade accords and implementing foreign trade policy measures by different countries. On how to judge whether goods concerned have undergone "substantial changes", however, there lacks a unified and detailed criterion for its application. The "International Convention on Customs Procedures of Simplification and Harmonization" stipulated by the Customs Co-operation Council in 1973 contains in its appendix one annex on the rules of origin, which indicates only principles but no enforceable provisions. The Uruguay Round negotiations of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) reached the "Agreement on Rules of Origin", aiming at co-ordinating member countries' rules of origin on non-preferential imports. The job to formulate the technical standards on the co-ordination principle was entrusted to the World Customs Organization but has not been accomplished till today. Due to the lack of internationally unified rules of origin, countries formulate rules of origin according to their own needs, resulting in different criteria, leaving room for discretion.

　　特别需要指出的是，随着世界经济发展和经济格局的巨大变化，原产地原则的局限性愈来愈清楚地暴露出来。过去国际贸易和投资数额不大，各国之间商品交换关系比较简单，按原产地统计大致可以反映国与国之间的分工、贸易关系以及相应的利益格局。现在由于世界各国经济贸易关系迅速发展，跨国投资日趋增加，国际贸易所交换的已经远不是单个国家生产的产品，而是跨越国界的“世界性产品”。按现行原产地统计进出口贸易的办法，显然难以准确反映世界经济发展变化的大势，甚至会扭曲国与国之间的贸易平衡状况。

      It deserves to be specially noted that the limitations of the old rules of origin are being increasingly exposed by the development of the world economy and great changes in the global economic pattern. In the past when cross-border trade and investment were scarce and commodity exchange ties among countries relatively simple, statistics based on the origin of goods could grossly reflect the division of labour, trade relations and corresponding pattern of interests among countries. Today, propelled by fast-growing economic and trade co-operation among countries in the world and cross-border investment that is increasing by the day, goods exchanged through international trade are no longer products made by one country, but "world products" whose manufacture involves efforts from several countries. It is obviously difficult for the current rules of origin, as employed by trade statistics, to accurately reflect the main changes in world economic development; these rules could even result in a distorted picture of trade balance situation.

　　近二三十年来，一些国家和地区加工贸易的迅速发展，更增加了这一问题的复杂性。加工贸易是指一国从国外进口主要原材料、零部件，加工装配后复出口的一种贸易方式。由于货物在该国发生了实质性改变，按原产地统计，便将该国列为原产地国。但由于主要原材料、零部件来自进口，该国从中获得的实际收益往往并不高。1996年9月22日美国《洛杉矶时报》刊登的文章《芭比娃娃与世界经济》中所举的芭比娃娃的例子，就是一个很好的说明。这篇文章说，从中国进口的“芭比娃娃”玩具，在美国的零售价为9.99美元，而从中国的进口价仅为2美元。在这2美元中，中国只获得35美分的劳务费，其余65美分用于进口原材料，1美元是运输和管理费用。按原产地统计，将这2美元全部计为中国对美国的出口，显然是不合理的。

      Processing trade that has boomed in some countries and regions over the last two to three decades had the problem further complicated. Processing trade means a country importing main raw materials and auxiliary parts to be processed or assembled and re-exported. According to current rules, the country is deemed the place of origin because within it the imported goods have undergone substantial changes. Due to the fact that main raw materials and auxiliary parts are imported, however, the processing country often profits little from the trade. This was well illustrated in the "Barbie doll" example cited in the "Barbie and the World Economy" story which was run on the September 22, 1996 edition of the Los Angles Times. The story said that in the United States, the retail price of a "Barbie" toy imported from China was 9.99 US dollars compared to an import price of 2 US dollars. Of the 2 US dollars, China gained 35 US cents in service fee, another 65 US cents were spent on importing raw materials and still another 1 US dollar covers costs of transportation and management. To account the 2 US dollars as the revenue of Chinese exports to the United States according to rules of origin is clearly unreasonable.

　　中国自90年代以来外贸出口增长的一个重要因素是加工贸易出口的扩大。1990年至1996年，中国出口总额从621亿美元增加到1511亿美元，平均每年增长16%，其中加工贸易出口从254.2亿美元增加到843.3亿美元，平均每年增长22.1%，加工贸易出口占出口总额的比重从41%增加到55.8%，在对美出口中高达70%。中国的加工贸易，大部分是80年代中期以来，美国、日本等发达国家以及新加坡、韩国、香港、台湾等国家和地区，为降低生产成本和提高竞争能力，转移劳动密集型产业或工序而发展起来的。其产品依赖原有的销售渠道，主要经香港等地转口到美国等传统市场。按原产地原则统计，产品的出口国就从这些国家和地区转移到了中国。据美国商务部公布的数据和美中贸易全国委员会的报告，从1987年到1995年，美国对新加坡、韩国以及香港和台湾地区的贸易逆差，从340亿美元减少到78亿美元，同期对中国的贸易逆差从28亿美元增加到338亿美元。这些数据反映了上述转移过程，也说明美国对这些亚洲国家和地区的贸易平衡关系，在总体上并没有实质性的变化。近几年，中国对美出口三分之二以上是经过香港地区转口的。这些产品在香港的增值率远高于在中国内地的增值率，香港实际获利远远高于中国内地。如果把在香港增值较大的部分计为香港的出口，中国对美贸易顺差就会相应减少，甚至成为逆差。

      Processing trade expansion is a major factor behind China's export growth in the 1990s. Total export volume rose to 151.1 billion US dollars in 1996 from 62.1 billion US dollars in 1990, up 16% per year on average. In the period, processing trade soared from 25.42 billion US dollars to 84.33 billion US dollars, an annual rise of 22.1%. In the 1990-96 period, the ratio of processing trade to overall Chinese exports rose from 41% to 55.8% and even amounted to 70% in its share of Chinese exports to the United States in 1996. The bulk of the sector has developed since the mid-1980s when investors from developed countries including the United States and Japan as well as Singapore, the Republic of Korea, and the Hong Kong and Taiwan regions started to move their labour-intensive industries or production procedures to China in a bid to cut production cost and enhance international competitiveness. Dependent on overseas investors' original marketing channels, processing trade products are primarily sold to their traditional markets including the United States via entrepot trade through Hong Kong. To calculate them according to certain rules of origin, China -- instead of the investors' home countries or regions and exporters of materials and auxiliary parts -- became the exporter. According to statistics published by the US Department of Commerce and reports from the US-China Business Council, the United States' trade deficit against Singapore, the Republic of Korea and the Hong Kong and Taiwan regions fell from 34 billion US dollars to 7.8 billion US dollars in the 1987-95 period, and in the meantime its trade deficit against China rocketed from 2.8 billion US dollars to 33.8 billion US dollars. These figures reflected the aforementioned process of place-of-origin transfer and showed that the trade balance between the United States and the countries and regions in Asia as a whole has not substantially changed over the years. In recent years, more than two-thirds of US-bound Chinese exports have undergone entrepot trade in the Hong Kong region. The value added at Hong Kong has been far greater than that in China's mainland, hence Hong Kong has benefited far more than the mainland from the processing trade. If that part of the added value is counted as Hong Kong exports, China's trade surplus against the United States will drop accordingly, or even turn into deficit.

　　由此不难得出结论：

      Hence it is not difficult to conclude that, 

　　在使用原产地统计的同时，必须充分认识它的局限性，透过表面数字，认真分析各方在贸易中获得的实际利益。这样才有助于消除误解，妥善解决国与国之间的贸易争端。


      While applying the origin-based statistics, it is imperative to be fully aware of the method's limitations and discern from the figures the actual benefits of all trading parties after careful analysis. That is the only way conducive to removing misunderstanding and properly settling bilateral trade disputes.

　　必须考虑国际经济交往日益密切和国际投资、服务贸易等日益增长的趋势，改进和完善贸易统计方法，使统计数字符合客观实际，为世界各国间的互利合作和世界经济贸易的健康发展，创造良好的条件。

      It is also a must to note the trend of increasingly closer international economic links and ever-growing cross-border investment and service trade that are growing by the day, and on that ground improve and perfect the computing of trade figures so that statistics will comply with reality and better serve the mutually beneficial co-operation among countries in the world.


美国对中国出口管制是双边贸易平衡的主要障碍

US Export Control Against China -- a Major Obstacle for Bilateral Trade Balance

多年来，美国对中国采取歧视性出口管制政策。这是制约美国对中国出口，影响双边贸易平衡的主要障碍。
The United States has adopted discriminatory export control policies towards China for many years. These policies have hindered US exports to China and therefore have become a major obstacle for bilateral trade balance.

　　人们看到，1979年中美建交以来，美国逐步放松了对华出口管制，先后将中国划入“P”组和“V”组。但是，在美国的政策规定和执行过程中，仍保留有许多歧视性规定，使中国未能真正享受到“V”组国家的待遇。1983年以后，包括美国在内的原巴黎统筹委员会成员国，开始考虑放宽对中国的出口管制，并于1985年9月形成简化对中国出口审批程序的决议，但同时提出对出口到中国的所谓“受控商品”不能改变用户和用途的要求。中国政府对此作出了积极反应。多年来，中国政府对“最终用户”和“最终用途”的有关承诺一直持严肃认真态度，相应采取了一系列积极措施，效果是明显的。对于中国政府出具的《最终用户和最终用途说明》，其它西方国家均予以承认并接受，只有美国仍持疑虑态度，要求中方对美国出口的所谓“受控商品”做这样那样的额外承诺，如提出对最终用户实施许可前检查及到货后核实的要求，对出口许可证附带各种苛刻条件，如24小时现场监控、随时抽样检验等，这些都是中国难以接受的。1994年3月，作为冷战产物的巴黎统筹委员会宣布解散，美国出口管制政策不能不作某些调整，但其对中国歧视性的出口管制政策基本没有改变。

      It is acknowledged that, since the two countries established diplomatic relations in 1979, the United States has relaxed control on exports to China by categorizing the latter into group "P" first and group "V" later. But China has not fully enjoyed treatment for "V" countries as the United States has retained a number of discriminatory measures in its policy making and implementation. It was after 1983 that member states of the former COMCO, including the United States, began to consider an ease of export control on China. In September of 1985, resolutions were adopted to simplify approval procedures concerning exports to China, which, however, demanded not to change the final use and end users of "controlled export items". The Chinese Government's response was positive. For many years, the Chinese Government has been earnest in carrying out its promise about "end users" and "final use". Certain effective measures have been adopted to honour the promise. The results have been obvious. Other Western countries have accepted "Elaboration on End Users and Final Use" made by the Chinese Government. However, only the United States have indicated doubts, demanding China to come up with extra undertakings about US "controlled export items". For example, end users should accept pre-licensing inspection and double check after unloading of imported goods; and various unduly strict conditions are attached to granting of licenses, such as around-the-clock spot surveillance and free random check. All these are difficult for China to accept. Upon the disintegration of COMCO -- a product of the Cold War -- in March 1994, the United States could not but adjust its export control policies. Nevertheless, its discriminatory measures towards China remained largely intact.

　　我们注意到，80年代美国对华出口管制有所放宽，双边经贸关系由此得到一定改善和发展。但是，90年代以来，美国对中国采取了一系列新的制裁措施，其中多项涉及出口管制，这给中美经贸关系造成了严重后果，中美贸易平衡关系出现了新的变化，美方逐步由顺差转为逆差。这种损人而不利己的政策，很难说是明智的。

      We have noticed that Sino-US trade relations witnessed certain progress in the 1980s when the United States relaxed export control on China. But, since the beginning of the 1990s, the United States has instituted a series of new sanctions against China, many of which concern export control. This change has led to severe consequences and gradually an unfavourable reverse of trade balance for the United States. It is hard to say that such a change -- indeed a double-edged sword -- is wise.

　　美国对中国的歧视性出口管制政策，以及至今尚未解除的对华制裁措施，极大地限制了美国对中国的出口，也对美国在华进行高技术领域的投资带来了十分不利的影响，成为发展中美经贸合作关系的制约因素。美国对中国出口管制给中美经贸合作带来的负面影响，以及给美国厂商带来的损失，由以下事例可见一斑：

      The US export control policies and lingering sanctions against China have greatly restricted US exports to China as well as US investment in high-tech sectors on the territory of the latter. In short, these measures have bottlenecked Sino-US economic and trade co-operation. The negative effects of these measures on bilateral economic and trade co-operation and on US businesses can be seen in the following examples:

　　早在80年代初期，中方企业曾与美国西屋公司、通用电气公司等就购买秦山30万千瓦、大亚湾90万千瓦核电站设备进行过技术与商务谈判，但由于美国政府出口管制而未果。《中美和平利用核能合作协定》是中美两国政府于1985年签订的，中国方面随即批准了这一协定，但美国国会在批准协定时附加许多先决条件，致使协定至今未能生效。当前，中国的核电行业正处于发展时期，核电站建设需要进口大批技术设备。美国核电厂商对参与中国核电站建设抱有浓厚兴趣，但由于美国政府控制核能技术对中国出口而丧失了向中国出口的机会。

    In early 1980s, China conducted technical and commercial negotiations with the US Westinghouse and General Electric companies over the purchase of equipment for the Qinshan nuclear power plant (300,000 kilowatts) and the Daya Bay nuclear power plant (900,000 kilowatts). But the talks failed due to US export control. In 1985, China and the United States signed the "Agreement for Co-operation Between the Government of the People's Republic of China and the Government of the United States of America Concerning the Peaceful Use of Nuclear Energy". It was immediately approved by China. But the US Congress insisted on attaching many preconditions thereto. As a result, the protocol has yet to take effect. At present, China's nuclear power industry is expanding, prompting substantial import of technologies and equipment. US nuclear power enterprises, with enormous interests, have lost their chance of export to China because of the US Government control over nuclear energy technology.

　　80年代中期，中国计划引进集成电路和程控交换机技术及设备，由于美国政府的限制，使美国出口商失去了几十亿美元的出口机会。最近几年，中国仍希望从美国进口电子元器件及其生产检测设备，美国政府的歧视性出口管制阻碍着美国企业向中国的出口。

    In mid-1980s, similar restrictions ripped US exporters of potential business opportunities worth several billion US dollars when China planned to import technologies and equipment for integrated circuits and programme-controlled telephone switching boards. In recent years, China still hopes to buy electronic components and related manufacturing and testing equipment from the United States. But again, the US Government's discriminatory control policies have prevented US businesses from selling them to China.

　　中国需要进口先进机床设备，给美国制造厂商带来了良好的贸易机会。由于美国政府严格的出口管制，众多美国公司正常的对华贸易活动难以开展。

    China needs to import advanced machine tools, thus providing good trade opportunities for US manufacturers. But the US Government's strict export control has forestalled normal business with China.

　　此类事例，不胜枚举。美国政府歧视性的对中国出口管制政策，不仅使大量中国用户对美国出口商失去合作机会，也使美国出口商丧失了贸易机会。据有关方面的分析，由于美国歧视性的出口管制，近几年，每年美国要丧失对中国出口几十亿美元的贸易机会。美方一面强调对中国贸易逆差问题，一面又不放宽对中国出口管制，这是自相矛盾的。

      The above examples are but a drop in the sea. Under the US Government's discriminatory export control policies towards China, not only a large number of Chinese customers are unable to co-operate with US exporters, but US exporters themselves stand to lose trade opportunities. Some analyses have concluded that the United States has lost an average of several billion dollars of exports each year to China in the recent past due to such discriminatory policies. It makes no sense for the United States to play up trade deficit against China on the one hand, and continue its export control on the other.

　　在美国政府继续采取对中国歧视性出口管制政策的同时，其它工业发达国家政府相继取消歧视性政策，而且向中国提供资本品进口的政府间金融支持，从而促进了对中国的出口。这无疑会提高其商品在中国市场的竞争能力。正因为如此，欧盟国家对中国贸易不仅没有逆差，每年还有几十亿美元的贸易顺差。这充分显示了不同的对中国出口政策对双方贸易平衡带来的影响。

      While the US Government maintains such discriminatory export control policies towards China, other industrialized countries have, one by one, cancelled their discriminatory policies and have even provided China with governmental financial support for its import of capital goods. This has definitely enhanced the competitiveness of their products on the Chinese market. The European Union member countries are not only free from any trade deficit, but have enjoyed an average annual trade surplus worth several billion US dollars with China. This comparison between EU and the United States speaks aloud on the different effects on bilateral trade balance brought by different export policies towards China.

　　中国政府希望美国政府能从发展双边贸易与经济合作的长远利益考虑，切实采取有效措施，放宽乃至取消现行歧视性的出口管制政策，为促进中美贸易平衡健康发展多做些有益的工作。这是解决中美贸易平衡问题的现实出路。

      The Chinese Government hopes the US Government will, proceeding from the long-term interest of bilateral trade and economic co-operation, adopt effective measures to relax or even cancel the current discriminatory export control policies against China so as to usher in a healthy and balanced Sino-US trade relationship. This is a realistic way of resolving the trade balance issue between China and the United States.

中美经济贸易合作有着广阔前景

Sino-US Economic and Trade Co-operation Shows Vast Vistas

　　中美贸易的持续均衡发展，是两国之间长期经济贸易合作的需要。中国方面一直非常重视并采取积极措施扩大自美国进口。中国市场对美国的产品和服务是开放的。多年来，中国购买了大量的美国产品，美商在华投资领域和规模不断扩大，为美国企业带来了巨大的利益。

      Lasting economic and trade co-operation between China and the United States requires sustainable and balanced growth in bilateral trade. The Chinese side has always paid great attention to the need and taken active measures to increase imports from the United States. China's market is open to US goods and services. Over the past years, China has purchased a great amount of US products. Investment sectors in China for US businesses have widened and the scale of US investment in the country has been growing continuously. All these have brought US enterprises huge profits.

　　在商品贸易方面，从1979年到1996年，中国累计购买美国小麦6947.6万吨，共计116.2亿美元，目前中国已成为美国小麦的最大买主；累计购买美国化肥4624.3万吨，共计95.6亿美元；累计购买美国飞机308架，共计87.2亿美元。

      Trade in commodities: Between 1979 and 1996, China bought 69.476 million tons, or 11.62 billion US dollars worth, of wheat from the United States. Now, China is the largest buyer of US wheat. In the period, China also bought 46.243 million tons, or 9.56 billion US dollars worth, of chemical fertilizers and 308 aircraft worth 8.72 billion US dollars from the United States.

　　在来华投资方面，美商投资迅速增加。美国《幸福杂志》提名的500家大企业中，目前在华有投资的已超过100家，分布于众多领域。

      US investment in China: US investment in China has been increasing rapidly. Among the top-500 US enterprises listed by the Fortune magazine, more than 100 have so far invested in various fields in China.

　　在银行与保险方面，美国已有5家银行在中国开设了8家分行。在华开业的6家外国保险公司中有3家是美国公司，分别是由美国国际集团下属美国友邦保险公司和美国美亚保险公司开设的。

      Banking and insurance: Five US banks have altogether set up eight branches in China. Three out of the six foreign insurers operating in China are US companies, respectively set up by American International Assurance Co. and the AIU Insurance Co. -- both subsidiaries of American International Group Inc. (AIG).


　　在航运服务方面，美国总统轮船（中国）公司和美国海陆轮船（中国）公司是最先在中国开业的外商独资船务公司，目前这两家公司已在中国拥有9家分公司。
 
      Shipping services: APL (China) and Sealand (China) are the earliest wholly foreign-owned shipping companies to start operating in China, where they already have nine subsidiaries at present.     

　　在商业零售方面，美国企业也进入了中国市场，其中包括美国著名的沃马特公司。

      Retailing: US retailers, including the renowned Walmart Co., have also entered the Chinese market.      

　　为了进一步开放中国市场，中美双方于1992年10月签订了《中美市场准入谅解备忘录》。几年来，中方切实履行了备忘录规定的各项义务，并根据中国改革开放的进程，采取了一系列积极措施。例如，在动植物检疫方面，中方在同美方专家共同研究、科学分析的基础上，取消了对美华盛顿州苹果、加利福尼亚州小麦的限制，并与美方签署了有关猪、马、犬及遗传物质等方面的新的进口检疫认定书。1994年4月，中美双方就美华盛顿州樱桃、爱达荷州和俄勒冈州有关品种苹果进入中国市场的卫生检疫条款达成了协议。这些都有利于中美经贸关系的进一步发展。

      In order to open China's market wider, China and the United States signed the Memorandum of Understanding Between the Government of the People's Republic of China and the Government of the United States of America Concerning Market Access in October 1992. In the following years, China has made earnest efforts to fulfill the various obligations as stipulated in the memorandum, and has taken a series of active measures in line with its reforms and opening drive. Take sanitary and phyto-sanitary quarantine as an example: After joint research and analyses by experts from both countries, China not only abolished its import control over apples from the Washington State and wheat from California, but has signed with the United States new quarantine protocols on such imports as pigs, horses, dogs and genetic materials. In April 1994, China and the United States reached an agreement on hygiene quarantine provisions on cherry imports from the Washington State and imports of relevant species of apples grown in Idaho and Oregon. All these have helped further development of Sino-US economic and trade ties.

　　中国正处在经济快速发展时期。从现在到本世纪末，中国的经济增长率将在8%以上，下个世纪前十年增长率将保持7%以上，市场前景广阔。以能源、交通建设为例，今后五年，中国将新增发电装机容量8000万千瓦，新建铁路16000公里，高速公路2800公里，光纤通讯线路150000公里，新增电话交换机7000—8000万门。中国将继续积极合理有效地引进国外资金、技术和设备。从1978年到1996年，中国的进口贸易额从109亿美元增加到1388亿美元，平均每年增长15.2%。从1997年到2000年，进口总额累计将超过7000亿美元。中国经济的发展将为世界贸易和投资提供广阔的市场。美国商务部1994年就将中国列在世界“十大新兴市场”之首，这反映了美国对中国市场潜力的高度评价。中国市场是日益开放的，同时也是竞争激烈的。我们愿意看到美国企业在中国市场上有更多的竞争机会。

      China is now in a period of rapid economic growth, estimated to average at least 8% a year in the run-up to 2000 and maintain above 7% in the first decade of the 21st century -- promising broad market potentials. An example is the market demand for energy and communications construction. In the next five years, China will increase its installed power-generating capacity by 80,000 megawatts and build 16,000-kilometres-long new railways plus another 2,800 kilometres of freeways. It also plans to build another 150,000 kilometres of optic fibre cables and increase telephone switching capacity by 70-80 million lines. China will continue to introduce overseas capital, technologies and equipment in an active, rational and effective way. China's imports increased to 138.8 billion US dollars in 1996 from 10.9 billion US dollars in 1978, representing an annual average growth of 15.2%. Between 1997 and 2000, cumulative imports to China will top 700 billion US dollars. China's economic growth will offer a massive market for world trade and investment. Back in 1994, the United States' Department of Commerce had put China on the top of "top-10 emerging markets" reflecting its high evaluation on potentials of the Chinese market. The Chinese market is opening wider while the competition is also getting tougher. We are willing to see that US enterprises win more chances to compete on the Chinese market.

　　中国对美国的出口，主要是劳动密集产品，这些产品不会对美国企业的生产构成竞争。美国《华盛顿邮报》1996年6月刊登的一篇文章中，援引美国国际经济研究所经济学家的话说：“美国从中国进口的玩具、鞋类等产品的确越来越多，但是这些工业在美国已经几乎绝迹了”。1996年12月，美国经济战略研究所所长克莱德·普雷斯托维茨在《美国新闻与世界报道》刊登的一篇文章中指出，中国对美出口，大多产生于我们已不再生产任何产品的行业。中国劳动密集产品对美国出口，不仅不会影响美国的工业生产和就业，也不会影响美国产品在国际市场上的份额，是对美国经济结构的有益补充，有利于美国经济结构的调整。

      Chinese exports to the United States are mainly labour-intensive products. These products pose no threat to the production of US enterprises. An economist from the US-based Institute of International Economics was quoted by a Washington Post story in June 1996 as saying: It is true that the United States imports more and more toys and shoes from China, but these industries have almost vanished in the United States. Clyde Prestowitz, president of the Economic Strategy Institute of the United States, pointed out in an article in a December 1996 issue of the US News & World Report that China's exports to the United States are large in industries where the United States does not make things anymore. Labour-intensive Chinese exports to the United States will neither affect industrial production and employment in the United States, nor affect international market shares for US products. Instead, they are beneficial complements to the economic structure of the United States and can help the United States to readjust its economic structure.

　　近年来，随着中国经济体制改革的逐步深化，涉外法律体系日益健全，贸易、投资环境不断改善，知识产权保护制度得到实施。在贸易体制透明度问题上，中国已经清理、公布了全部原有内部管理文件，公开废止了744件，并于1993年设立了《对外贸易经济合作部文告》，专门刊登对外经济贸易管理法规。进一步放宽了进口限制，到1995年底中国已取消协议项下826个税号商品的进口许可证和配额控制。近一年来，中国在涉外经济体制和政策方面，又采取了一系列新的重大举措：

      Paralleling with the gradual deepening of its economic reforms in recent years, China has increasingly amplified its foreign-related legal system, steadily improved its trade and investment environment and enforced the intellectual property rights protection system. On the issue of trade system transparency, China has sorted out and publicized all management documents that used to be deemed confidential and publicly abolished 744 of them. In 1993, the Bulletin of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Co-operation of the People's Republic of China was launched to exclusively carry laws and regulations on the management of foreign trade and economic co-operation. Import restriction was further eased and by the end of 1995, China had rescinded import licensing and quota control over 826 tariff lines. Since the past year, China has again taken a series of imortant measures in improving its foreign-related economic regime and policies as follows:

　　从1996年4月起，大幅度降低关税，涉及4000多个税号，平均关税水平从35.3%降低至23%，并宣布在2000年使总体关税水平降至15%。

      A massive cut in the import tariffs of more than 4,000 tariff lines was introduced in April 1996, bringing average tariff from 35.3% down to 23%. It has also pledged to further lower overall tariff rate to 15% by the year 2000.

　　采取积极步骤，分阶段取消非关税措施，非关税措施涉及的产品已从1247种降至384种，并提出继续取消的时间表。

      China has taken active steps to phase out non-tariff measures. Only 384 items of imports are subject to the measures today as compared with 1,247 before. China has also set forth a timetable to further lift such measures.


　　1996年，实现了人民币经常项目下的可兑换，使外资企业的经常性国际交易支付和转移不受限制。

      In 1996, the Chinese currency Renminbi became freely convertible under the current account, enabling foreign-invested companies to be free in international settlement and transfer under the current account.

　　国内商业、金融、保险、对外贸易等服务领域的对外开放已经开始试验实施。外国的一些企业和金融机构已进入这些领域的市场。在上海浦东一些外资银行也已开始经营人民币业务。

      China has started, on a trial basis, to open its market to foreign investors in such service sectors as domestic retailing, finance, insurance and foreign trade. Some foreign companies and financial institutions have already entered these markets. In the Pudong New Area of Shanghai, some foreign banks have begun handling Renminbi business.

　　2000年，中国将初步建立社会主义市场经济体制，建立统一规范的对外经济体制，这将为包括美国在内的各国工商界发展同中国的经济贸易交流与合作创造更好的条件。

      By the year 2000, China will have initially established a system of socialist market economy and built up a unified and standard foreign-related economic regime, which will create better conditions for the world's business communities including those from the United States to develop economic and trade co-operation with China.

　　在国际贸易中，基本原则是平等互利，各国追求各自的利益是正常的，出现一些摩擦和纠纷也是难以完全避免的。关键在于要以冷静而明智的态度正确对待和处理。中国一贯主张，对于双边和多边经济贸易关系中出现的摩擦和争端，有关方面应当本着相互尊重的原则，通过友好协商谋求合理解决。中美关系经历曲折，应该珍视中美贸易发展的主流，着眼于未来，以建设性的态度面对现实。采取盛气凌人的态度，动辄以贸易制裁相威胁，提出对方难以接受的要求，甚至执行制裁措施，将不利于问题的解决，只会损害双方的利益。

      Equality and mutual benefit are the cardinal principle of international trade. It is normal that countries will seek to protect their own interests, which may lead to trade frictions and disputes. The key lies in how to cope with these issues correctly in a cool and wise way. China has always advocated that parties involved should adhere to the principle of mutual respect and settle bilateral or multilateral trade disputes, reasonably, through friendly discussions. Having experienced a winding course in their bilateral relations, China and the United States should cherish the mainstream in the two-way trade development, look to the future and face the reality with a constructive attitude. Bullying, forcing unacceptable demands on the other through constant threats of trade sanctions and even actually imposing sanctions will not help solve problems but cause damage to the interests of both sides.

　　扩大中美经济贸易合作是中国方面真诚的愿望，也是美国的利益所在。中美两国政府有责任为双边经济贸易的长期发展，提供一个良好、稳定的环境，切实改善双边经贸关系，为两国贸易的发展和平衡奠定坚实基础。我们欢迎美国工商企业界积极参与中国市场的平等竞争。我们希望美国政府采取切实有力的政策措施，促进中美经济贸易的更大发展。

      It is China's sincere wish and also to the interest of the United States to expand bilateral trade and economic co-operation. Both governments are obliged to provide a sound and stable climate for the long-term development of the bilateral trade and economic co-operation. It is their duty to substantially improve bilateral trade ties and lay a solid foundation for developing and balancing trade between the two countries. We welcome the business communities from the United States to play an active role in fair competition on the Chinese market. We wish the US Government will take forcible measures to fuel stronger growth in two-way trade and economic co-operation.

　　我们高兴地看到，1996年11月，江泽民主席与克林顿总统在菲律宾马尼拉亚太经合组织非正式首脑会议期间举行会晤，就发展全面、健康、稳定的中美关系达成了广泛的共识。中美商贸、经济和科技等三个联委会的相继召开，以积极务实的态度推动了中美经贸关系的发展，加强了交流与合作，促进了相互谅解，为中美关系注入了新的活力。放眼未来，中国对中美经贸合作的发展抱有信心。中美两国有充分的理由，共同努力，开创经贸关系新的良好前景，这符合两国人民的根本利益。

      We are happy to note that, when they met on the sideline of the summit meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) forum last November in Manila, the Philippines, Chinese President Jiang Zemin and US President Bill Clinton reached a wide range of consensus on the comprehensive, healthy and stable development in bilateral ties. Following the summit, three Sino-US joint committees on commerce and trade, economy and science and technology were convened in succession. The active and pragmatic attitude as reflected in the meetings helped promote the development in bilateral trade ties, reinforce exchange and co-operation, enhance mutual understanding and inject new vigour into bilateral ties. Looking to the future, China has confidence in the development of Sino-US economic and trade co-operation. China and the United States have every reason and should strive together to open new and better prospects in their trade ties. It serves the fundamental interests of both peoples.
中国的国防
China's National Defense

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China

一九九八年七月?北京
July 1998, Beijing


目录
Contents 

前言
Foreword

国际安全形势
The International Security Situation

国防政策
National Defense Policy

国防建设
National Defense Construction

国防体制
Defense System

军事法制建设
Military Legislative Work

国防费
Defense Expenditure

裁减军队员额
Reducing Military Personnel

参加和支援国家建设
Participating in and Supporting National Construction

驻军香港
Stationing a Garrison in Hong Kong

国际安全合作
 International Security Cooperation

对外军事交往
Foreign Military Contacts

建立信任措施
Promoting Confidence-Building Measures

地区安全合作
Regional Security Cooperation

参与联合国维持和平行动
Participating in the UN Peace-Keeping Operations

军控与裁军
 Arms Control and Disarmament

核武器问题
The Issue of Nuclear Weapons

化学和生物武器问题
The Issue of Chemical and Biological Weapons

外空非武器化问题
The Issue of Keeping Outer Space Weapon-Free

杀伤人员地雷问题
The Issue of Anti-Personnel Landmines

敏感物资和军事装备出口控制
Control of the Export of Sensitive Materials and Military Equipment


前 言
Foreword 

　　人类历史即将进入21世纪。把一个和平、稳定、繁荣的世界带入新世纪，是中国政府和人民的愿望。

　　Mankind is about to enter the 21st century of its history. It is the aspiration of the Chinese government and people to lead a peaceful, stable and prosperous world into the new century.

　　处在世纪之交的重要历史时期，中国正致力于现代化建设。中国需要并十分珍惜一个长期的国际和平环境，特别是良好的周边环境。中国人民愿同世界各国人民一道，为促进世界和平与发展的崇高事业，开创人类美好的未来，作出不懈的努力。

　　At the turn of the century, an important historical period, China is devoting itself to its modernization drive. China needs and cherishes dearly an environment of long-term international peace, especially a favorable peripheral environment. The Chinese people are willing, together with the people of the other countries in the world, to make unremitting efforts for the lofty cause of promoting world peace and development, and for initiating a glorious future for mankind. 

　　基于和平与发展的愿望，中国坚定不移地奉行防御性的国防政策，坚持国防建设服从和服务于国家经济建设，加强国际和地区安全合作，积极参与国际军备控制与裁军进程。事实证明，中国是负责任的大国，是维护世界和平与稳定的一支坚定力量。

　　Guided by its aspiration for peace and development, China unswervingly pursues a national defense policy that is defensive in nature, keeps national defense construction in a position subordinate to and in the service of the nation's economic construction, strengthens international and regional security cooperation and actively participates in the international arms control and disarmament process. Facts show that China is a responsible big country and a firm force safeguarding world peace and stability. 

　　中国曾于1995年发表《中国的军备控制与裁军》白皮书，主要介绍了中国在军控与裁军领域的实际努力与进展。在这里，将就中国国防建设的有关情况，作进一步的介绍和阐述。

　　In 1995 China issued a white paper titled, China: Arms Control and Disarmament, which mainly describes China's substantial efforts and progress in the sphere of arms control and disarmament. Here China wishes to present a further introduction to and exposition of her work in defense.

　　国际安全形势

　　The International Security Situation

　　和平与发展是当今时代的主题。要和平、求合作、促发展已经成为不可抗拒的历史潮流。

　　Peace and development are the major themes of the present era. The striving for peace and cooperation, and the promotion of development have become irresistible historical trends. 

　　当前，国际安全形势总体上继续趋向缓和。冷战结束后，多极化趋势在全球或地区范围内，在政治、经济等领域都有新的发展，世界上各种力量出现新的分化和组合。大国关系经历着重大而深刻的调整，各种伙伴关系逐渐向机制化方向发展，各国独立自主、联合自强、协调发展的意识正在加强。发展中国家总体实力增强，正在成为国际舞台上的一支重要力量。多极化趋势和经济全球化的持续发展，使国与国之间的相互依存和制约进一步加深，也有助于世界的和平、稳定与繁荣。维护世界和平的因素正在不断增长。

　　In general, the present international security situation has continued to tend toward relaxation. With the end of the cold war, a tendency toward multipolarity has further developed both globally or regionally in the political, economic and other fields as various world forces are experiencing new splits and realignments. The relations among the major powers are undergoing significant and profound readjustments; various kinds of partnerships are gradually developing along the line of institutionalization; and each country is enhancing its consciousness of independence, unity for strength, and coordinated development. The overall strength of the developing countries is growing, and they are becoming an important force on the international stage. The sustained development of the multipolarity tendency and economic globalization has further deepened their mutual reliance and mutual condition and helped toward world peace, stability and prosperity. The factors for safeguarding world peace are growing constantly. 

　　武装冲突和局部战争对世界全局的影响明显减弱。在过去两大军事集团对峙的背景下，一些地区的武装冲突和局部战争严重影响了世界的安全和稳定。冷战后的一个时期，地区冲突频仍，并呈上升趋势。但近几年来，一些持续多年的冲突和战乱有的已经得到解决，有的正走上政治解决的轨道或逐步降温。目前，因领土、资源争端及民族、宗教纷争而引起的武装冲突和局部战争，其规模、强度和地域相对有限，并得到不同程度的控制。国际社会的调解努力日益增加，能力不断增强。

　　The influence of armed conflicts and local wars on the overall international situation has been remarkably weakened. In the past, when the two major military blocs confronted each other, armed conflicts and local wars in some regions seriously disturbed world security and stability. For a time in the post-cold war period, regional conflicts were still frequent, even showing a trend of escalation. In the past few years, however, some conflicts and wars that had lasted for many years have been settled, and some are being put on the track of political settlement, or are gradually being cooled down. At present, armed conflicts and local wars touched off by disputes about territory, natural resources, ethnicity or religion are relatively limited in terms of scale, intensity and region, and are under control to varying degrees. The international community is making more and more efforts to mediate such disputes, with its capability to do so improving constantly.

　　军事因素在国家安全中仍占有重要地位。在新的国际安全环境中，世界多数国家在注重运用政治、经济和外交等手段解决争端的同时，仍把军事手段以及加强军事力量作为维护自身安全和国家利益的重要途径。一场以发展高技术武器为先导的军事领域的深刻变革正在世界范围内兴起。这场变革发展迅猛，对军队的武器装备、体制编制、作战训练及军事理论等方面将产生重大而深远的影响。为适应新的形势并争取自身优势，许多国家纷纷调整国防政策和军事战略，普遍压缩军备规模，更加注重质量建军。
 
　　Military factors still occupy an important position in state security. In the new international security environment, while stressing the settlement of disputes through political, economic and diplomatic means, most countries still regard military means and the reinforcement of military strength as important ways to safeguard their own security and national interests. A profound reform in the military field led by the development of high-tech weapons is taking place throughout the world. This reform, which is developing rapidly, will exert an important and profound influence on weaponry, military system and setup, combat training and military theory. To adapt to the new situation and strive for their own advantages, many countries have readjusted their defense policies and military strategies, reduced the scale of armaments and paid more attention to improving the quality of their armed forces. 

　　经济安全在国家安全中的地位日益重要。在国际关系中，地缘政治、军事安全、意识形态因素仍然发挥着不可忽视的作用，但经济因素的作用更趋突出，国家间经济联系不断加强。以经济和科技为主的综合国力竞争进一步加剧，世界范围内围绕市场和资源等经济权益的斗争日趋激烈，经济全球化的加快和区域集团化的加深使一国的经济发展更容易受到外来因素的影响和冲击。因此，越来越多的国家把经济安全视为国家安全的一个重要方面，亚洲金融危机使经济安全问题更为突出，提出了经济全球化过程中各国政府加强协调、共迎挑战的新课题。

　　Economic security is becoming daily more important for state security. In international relations, geopolitical, military security and ideological factors still play a role that cannot be ignored, but the role of economic factors is becoming more outstanding, along with growing economic contacts among nations. The competition to excel in overall national strength, focused on economy and science and technology, is being further intensified; globewide struggles centered on markets, natural resources and other economic rights and interests are daily becoming sharper; and the quickening of economic globalization and intensification of the formation of regional blocs render the economic development of a country more vulnerable to outside influences and impacts. Therefore, more and more countries regard economic security as an important aspect of state security. The financial crisis in Asia has made the issue of economic security more prominent, and has set a new task for governments of all countries to strengthen coordination and face challenges together in the course of economic globalization. 

　　亚太地区政治安全形势相对稳定。亚太地区多极化趋势加快发展，大国关系出现战略性调整并逐步趋向稳定。尽管出现了亚洲金融危机，亚太地区仍是世界上最具经济发展活力的地区之一，发展经济是各国的首要任务。亚太各国经济相互依存加深，以和平手段解决彼此的争端，注重寻求共同利益的汇合点，加强合作与协调正在成为本地区国家关系的主流。各种区域性和次区域性的多边合作不断发展，安全对话与合作正在多层次、多渠道展开。  

　　The political security situation in the Asia-Pacific region is relatively stable. The development of the trend toward multipolarity in this region is being quickened, and the relations among the big nations are being readjusted strategically and gradually becoming stable. Despite the emergence of a nancial crisis in Asia, the Asia-Pacific region remains one of the areas with the greatest economic development vitality in the world, and developing the economy is the most important task for each country. The countries in the Asia-Pacific region rely more and more on each other economically, and, to solve their disputes by peaceful means, to stress the search for the meeting points of their common interests and to strengthen cooperation and coordination are becoming the main current of the relations among the countries of the region. Various forms of regional and sub-regional multilateral cooperation are constantly being developed, and security dialogues and cooperation are being carried out at many levels and through many channels.

　　在世界和地区范围内仍存在一些不安定因素。霸权主义和强权政治仍然是威胁世界和平与稳定的主要根源；冷战思维及其影响还有一定市场，扩大军事集团、强化军事同盟给国际安全增加了不稳定因素；有的国家依仗军事优势对他国进行军事威胁，甚至武装干涉；不公正、不合理的国际经济旧秩序仍在损害着发展中国家的利益；因民族、宗教、领土、资源等因素而引发的局部冲突时起时伏，国与国之间的一些历史遗留问题仍待解决；恐怖活动、武器扩散、走私贩毒、环境污染、难民潮等跨国问题，也给国际安全造成了新的威胁。

　　However, there still exist some factors of instability both globally and regionally: Hegemonism and power politics remain the main source of threats to world peace and stability; cold war mentality and its influence still have a certain currency, and the enlargement of military blocs and the strengthening of military alliances have added factors of instability to international security; some countries, by relying on their military advantages, pose military threats to other countries, even resorting to armed intervention; the old unfair and irrational international economic order still damages the interests of developing countries; local conflicts caused by ethnic, religious, territorial, natural resources and other factors arise now and then, and questions left over by history among countries remain unsolved; terrorism, arms proliferation, smuggling and trafficking in narcotics, environmental pollution, waves of refugees, and other transnational issues also pose new threats to international security. 

　　1998年5月，印度不顾国际社会的强烈反对，悍然进行核试验，挑起南亚核军备竞赛。之后，巴基斯坦针对印度核试验做出反应，也进行了核试验。印、巴相继核试验是对国际防止核武器扩散努力的沉重打击，给南亚地区乃至世界和平与稳定带来了严重的后果。国际社会加强防扩散机制的任务也更加紧迫。

　　In May 1998, in defiance of strong opposition by the international community India flagrantly carried out nuclear tests, thus provoking a nuclear arms race in South Asia. Then Pakistan followed suit, in response to India's nuclear tests. The nuclear tests successively conducted by India and Pakistan have seriously impeded the international non-nuclear arms proliferation efforts and produced grave consequences on peace and stability in the South Asian region and the rest of the world. The task for the international community to strengthen non-proliferation mechanisms has become even more pressing now. 

　　历史证明，冷战时期以军事联盟为基础、以增加军备为手段的安全观念和体制不能营造和平。在新形势下，扩大军事集团、加强军事同盟更有悖时代潮流。安全不能依靠增加军备，也不能依靠军事同盟。安全应当依靠相互之间的信任和共同利益的联系。通过对话增进信任，通过合作谋求安全，相互尊重主权，和平解决争端，谋求共同发展。要争取持久和平，必须摒弃冷战思维，培育新型的安全观念，寻求维护和平的新方式。中国认为，这种观念和方式应包括以下几个方面：

　　History has proved that the concepts and systems of security with military alliances as the basis and increasing military might as the means could not be conducive to peace during the cold war. Under the new situation, especially, enlarging military blocs and strengthening military alliances run counter to the tide of the times. Security cannot be guaranteed by an increase in arms, nor by military alliances. Security should be based on mutual trust and common interests. We should promote trust through dialogue, seek security through cooperation, respect each other's sovereignty, solve disputes through peaceful means and strive for common development. To obtain lasting peace, it is imperative to abandon the cold war mentality, cultivate a new concept of security and seek a new way to safeguard peace. China believes that this new concept and way should include the following: 

　　各国应在相互尊重主权和领土完整、互不侵犯、互不干涉内政、平等互利、和平共处五项原则基础上建立国与国之间的关系。这是全球和地区安全的政治基础和前提。各国有权选择自己的社会制度、发展战略和生活方式，任何国家都不得以任何方式、任何借口干涉他国内政，更不应进行军事威胁或侵犯。

　　The relations among nations should be established on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence: mutual respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. These are the political basis and premise of global and regional security. Each country has the right to choose its own social system, development strategy and way of life, and no country should interfere in the internal affairs of any other country in any way or under any pretext, much less resort to military threats or aggression. 

　　各国应在经济领域加强互利合作，相互开放，消除经贸交往中的不平等现象和歧视政策，逐步缩小国家之间的发展差距，谋求共同繁荣。这是全球和地区安全的经济基础。维护正常和良好的经济、贸易和金融秩序，不仅要有完善的宏观经济管理体制和健全的经济运行体系，而且要加强地区和世界的经济联系与合作，共同创造稳定、安全的外部经济环境。

　　In the economic field, all countries should strengthen mutually beneficial cooperation, open up to each other, eliminate inequalities and discriminatory policies in economic and trade relations, gradually reduce the development gaps between countries and seek common prosperity. Such steps can form the economic basis of global and regional security. Maintaining a normal and sound economic, trade and financial order calls for not only a perfect macro-economic management system as well as a sound system of economic operations, it also calls for strengthening regional and international economic contacts and cooperation, so as to jointly create a stable and secure external economic environment.

　　各国应通过对话与合作增进相互了解与信任，谋求以和平方式解决国家间的分歧和争端。这是确保和平与安全的现实途径。安全是相互的，安全对话和合作旨在促进信任，而非制造对抗，更不应针对第三国，不能损害别国的安全利益。

　　All countries should promote mutual understanding and trust through dialogue and cooperation, and seek the settlement of divergences and disputes among nations through peaceful means. These are the realistic ways to guarantee peace and security. Security is mutual, and security dialogues and cooperation should be aimed at promoting trust, not at creating confrontations, still less at directing the spearhead against a third country or infringing upon the security interests of any other nation. 

　　中国作为亚太国家，高度重视本地区的安全、稳定、和平与发展。中国的亚太安全战略有3个目标，即：中国自身的稳定与繁荣，周边地区的和平与稳定，与亚太各国开展对话与合作。为此，中国致力于与各国平等相待，友好合作，重视同地区各国及各主要力量发展健康稳定的关系；积极参与地区经济合作，促进开放的地区主义；坚持以和平方式处理和解决国家间的争端；积极参与地区安全对话与合作进程。

　　As a country in the Asia-Pacific region, China places great importance on the region's security, stability, peace and development. China's Asia-Pacific security strategy has three objectives, i.e., China's own stability and prosperity, peace and stability in its surrounding regions, and conducting dialogue and cooperation with all countries in the Asia-Pacific region. Hence China devotes its efforts to promoting equal treatment and friendly cooperation with other countries, and attaches importance to developing healthy and stable relations with all countries and all major forces in the region; actively participates in regional economic cooperation and promotes an open type of regionalism; insists on handling and settling disputes among countries through peaceful means; and takes an active part in the dialogue and cooperation process aimed at regional security.

　　中国在平等协商、互谅互让的基础上，同多数邻国妥善解决了边界领土问题。对于与有关邻国现存的领土和海洋权益争议，中国主张以大局为重、协商解决，使之不影响国家关系的正常发展和地区形势的稳定。中国明确提出，根据公认的国际法和现代海洋法，包括《联合国海洋法公约》所确定的基本原则和法律制度，通过和平谈判和磋商，妥善解决有关争议问题。

　　On the basis of equal consultation, mutual understanding and mutual accommodation, China has solved in an appropriate manner border issues with most of its neighbors. As for remaining disputes on territorial and marine rights and interests between China and neighboring countries, China maintains that they are to be solved through consultation by putting the interests of the whole above everything else, so that the disputes will not hamper the normal development of state relations or the stability of the region. China has clearly stated that relevant disputes should be properly solved through peaceful negotiation and consultation, in accordance with commonly accepted international laws and modern maritime laws, including the basic principles and legal systems as prescribed in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. 

　　台湾是中国领土不可分割的一部分。结束海峡两岸分裂局面，实现祖国统一，是包括台湾同胞在内的全体中国人民的崇高使命和共同愿望。中国政府坚持以“和平统一、一国两制”的基本方针解决台湾问题，坚决反对任何制造“台湾独立”、“两个中国”、“一中一台”等分裂国家的图谋和言行。台湾问题完全是中国内政。无论是直接还是间接把台湾海峡划入任何国家或军事同盟的安全合作范围，都是对中国主权的侵犯和干涉。中国政府努力谋求以和平方式实现国家的统一，但不承诺放弃使用武力。每一个主权国家都有权采取自己认为必要的一切手段包括军事手段，来维护本国的主权和领土完整。中国政府在采取何种方式处理台湾问题上，并无义务对任何国家或图谋分裂中国者作出承诺。中国政府反对任何国家对台军售。对台军售不仅违反基本的国际法准则，也对中国的安全及地区的和平与稳定构成威胁。

　　Taiwan is an inseparable part of Chinese territory. It is a lofty mission and a common aspiration of all Chinese people, including the Taiwan compatriots, to put an end to the cleavage between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits and realize the reunification of the motherland. The Chinese government adheres to its stand for solving the issue of Taiwan according to the basic principle of "peaceful reunification, and one country, two systems" and resolutely opposes any attempt, by words or deeds, to split the country by creating an "independent Taiwan", "two Chinas" or "one China, one Taiwan". The issue of Taiwan is entirely an internal affair of China. Directly or indirectly incorporating the Taiwan Straits into the security and cooperation sphere of any country or any military alliance is an infringement upon and interference in China's sovereignty. The Chinese government seeks to achieve the reunification of the country by peaceful means, but will not commit itself not to resort to force. Every sovereign state has the right to use all means it thinks necessary, including military means, to safeguard its own sovereignty and territorial integrity. In deciding which way to deal with the issue of Taiwan, the Chinese government has no obligation to make a commitment to any country or any person attempting to split China. The Chinese government opposes any country selling arms to Taiwan, which not only violates the basic norms of international law but also threatens China's security and regional peace and stability. 

　　中国政府始终不渝地奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，主张在和平共处五项原则和其他公认的国际关系准则基础上，同所有国家建立和发展友好合作关系，并愿同各国一道，为维护世界和平、促进国际安全与稳定作出不懈努力。

　　The Chinese government steadfastly follows an independent foreign policy of peace, and stands for establishing and developing relations of friendship and cooperation with all countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and other commonly recognized international relationship norms. China is willing to make unswerving efforts to safeguard world peace and promote international security together with other countries. 

　　国防政策

　　National Defense Policy
 
　　中国政府坚定不移地奉行防御性的国防政策。《中华人民共和国宪法》明确规定，中华人民共和国武装力量的任务是巩固国防，抵抗侵略，保卫祖国，保卫人民的和平劳动，参加国家建设事业，努力为人民服务。中国的国家利益、社会制度、对外政策和历史文化传统，决定中国必然实行防御性的国防政策。

　　The Chinese government firmly pursues a national defense policy that is defensive in nature. The Constitution of the People's Republic of China (PRC) clearly specifies the tasks of the armed forces of the PRC as being to consolidate national defense, resist aggression, defend the motherland, safeguard the people's peaceful labor, participate in national construction and strive to serve the people. China's state interests, social system, foreign policy and historical and cultural traditions postulate that China will inevitably adopt such a national defense policy. 

　　中国始终把维护国家的主权、统一、领土完整和安全放在第一位。1840年鸦片战争以后，中国逐渐变成半殖民地半封建国家，中华民族屡遭帝国主义列强的侵略、压迫和欺凌。中国人民经过长期前赴后继的英勇奋斗才取得国家独立和民族解放，因而极为珍惜来之不易的独立自主权利。保卫祖国，抵抗侵略，维护统一，反对分裂，是中国国防政策的出发点和立足点。

　　China has always attached primary importance to safeguarding the state's sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and security. Following the Opium War in 1840, China was gradually reduced to a semi-colonial and semi-feudal country, and the Chinese nation was subject to the imperialist powers' invasion, oppression, bullying and humiliation time and time again. After a protracted, persistent and heroic struggle, the Chinese people won the independence for their country and the emancipation of the nation; therefore they hold dear their hard-earned right to independence. Defending the motherland, resisting aggression, safeguarding unity and opposing split are the starting point and underpinning of China's defense policy. 

　　中国正处于社会主义初级阶段，国家的根本任务是集中力量进行社会主义现代化建设。中国人口多、底子薄，地区发展不平衡，生产力不发达的状况在相当长一段时间内还会继续存在。中国面临着极为繁重的经济建设任务，国防建设必须服从和服务于国家经济建设的大局。中国所选择的符合自己国情的社会制度、发展战略和生活方式，不会产生侵略别国的因素。

　　China being at the primary stage of socialism, the fundamental task of the state is to concentrate its strength on the socialist modernization program. The situation in which China has a large population, a poor foundation, uneven regional development and underdeveloped productive forces will continue for a comparatively long period of time to come. China is now confronted with the extremely heavy task of economic construction, so the work in defense must be subordinate to and in the service of the nation's overall economic construction. The social system, development strategy and way of life that China has chosen conform to the actual conditions of the country, and no factors prompting invasion of another country can emerge. 

　　中国的发展需要一个长期的国际和平环境特别是良好的周边环境。中国始终不渝地奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，主张从中国人民和世界人民的根本利益出发来处理国际事务，不同任何大国或国家集团结盟；主张通过协商和平解决国家间的纠纷和争端，反对诉诸武力或以武力相威胁，反对霸权主义和强权政治；主张在和平共处五项原则的基础上，建立公正合理的国际政治经济新秩序，同所有国家发展友好合作关系。中国永远是维护世界和平和地区稳定的重要力量。中国即使将来强大了，也决不走对外侵略扩张的道路。

　　The development of China requires an environment of long-term international peace, especially a favorable peripheral environment. China unswervingly pursues an independent foreign policy of peace, advocates handling international affairs in light of the fundamental interests of the Chinese and other people of the world, and refrains from forming alliances with any big power or any group of countries. China holds that conflicts and disputes among countries should be solved in a peaceful way through consultation, and opposes the threat or use of force, hegemonism and power politics. China advocates establishing a new fair and rational international political and economic order, and developing relations of friendship and cooperation with all countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. China will always be an important force defending world peace and regional stability. Even when China becomes strong and powerful in the future, it will by no means take to the road of foreign aggression and expansion.

　　中国实行防御性的国防政策，还渊源于中国的历史文化传统。中国是一个有五千年文明历史的国家，有爱好和平的传统。中国古代思想家曾提出过“亲仁善邻”的思想，反映了自古以来中国人民就希望天下太平、同各国人民友好相处。这种思想表现在军事上，就是主张用非军事手段来解决争端、慎重对待战争和战略上后发制人。在几千年的历史进程中，爱和平，重防御，求统一，促进民族团结，共御外侮，始终是中国国防观念的主题。新中国的国防政策，继承和发扬了中国优良的历史文化传统。

　　The defensive nature of China's national defense policy also springs from the country's historical and cultural traditions. China is a country with 5,000 years of civilization, and a peace-loving tradition. Ancient Chinese thinkers advocated ``associating with benevolent gentlemen and befriending good neighbors,'' which shows that throughout history the Chinese people have longed for peace in the world and for relations of friendship with the people of other countries. In military affairs, this maxim means solving disputes by non-military means, being wary of war and strategically gaining mastery by striking only after the enemy has struck. During the course of several thousand years, loving peace, stressing defense, seeking unification, promoting national unity, and jointly resisting foreign aggression have always been the main ideas of China's defense concept. The defense policy of New China has carried forward and developed such excellent Chinese historical and cultural traditions. 

　　中国的国防政策，主要包括以下内容：

　　China's defense policy has mainly the following aspects: 

　　巩固国防，抵抗侵略，制止武装颠覆，保卫国家的主权、统一、领土完整和安全。这是中国国防政策的基本目标，也是中国宪法赋予中国武装力量的主要职责。中国努力避免和制止战争，努力用和平方式解决国际争端和历史遗留问题。但是，在霸权主义和强权政治依然存在的情况下，国家必须具有用军事手段捍卫主权、统一、领土完整和安全的能力。中国的国防现代化建设完全是为了自卫，是保障国家现代化建设和安全的需要。中国武装力量的规模是与保卫国家安全和利益的需要相适应的。中国独立自主、自力更生地建设和巩固国防。

　　Consolidating national defense, resisting aggression, curbing armed subversion, and defending the state's sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and security. These are the basic objectives of China's defense policy, as well as the main tasks the Chinese Constitution has entrusted to China's armed forces. China spares no effort to avoid and curb war, and to solve international disputes and questions left over by history through peaceful means. However, as long as hegemonism and power politics still exist, a country must have the capability to defend its sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and security by military means. The modernization program of China's national defense work is entirely for self-defense, and arises from the need to safeguard the country's modernization drive and security. The size of China's armed forces is suited to the needs of defending the country's security and interests. China builds and consolidates its national defense independently and through self-reliance. 

　　国防建设服从和服务于国家经济建设大局，国防建设与经济建设协调发展。这是中国国防建设一个长期的基本方针。国防现代化需要国家的经济力量和技术力量的支持，国防现代化水平只能随着国家经济实力的增强而逐步提高。国家坚持以经济建设为中心，国防建设必须服从和服务于这个大局，军队积极参加和支援国家经济建设。国家在集中力量进行经济建设的同时，加强国防建设，促进国防建设与经济建设协调发展。

　　Subordinating national defense work to, and placing it in the service of, the nation's overall economic construction, and achieving the coordinated development of these two kinds of work. This is China's long-term basic policy for its work in defense. The modernization of the national defense of a country requires the support of its economic and technological forces; and the modernization level of national defense can only be improved gradually along with the increase of the country's economic strength. The Chinese government insists that economic construction be taken as the center, that defense work be subordinate to and in the service of the nation's overall economic construction and that the armed forces actively participate in and support the nation's economic construction. While concentrating its efforts on economic construction, the state also endeavors to improve its national defense work and to promote a coordinated development of the two. 

　　贯彻积极防御的军事战略方针。中国在战略上实行防御、自卫和后发制人的原则，坚持“人不犯我，我不犯人，人若犯我，我必犯人”。中国拥有少量核武器完全是出于自卫的需要。中国坚持全民自卫原则和人民战争的战略思想，增强全民国防观念，完善国防动员体制，加强国防后备力量建设；立足现有武器装备，继承和发扬优良传统；适应世界军事领域的深刻变革，做好现代技术特别是高技术条件下的防卫作战准备。

　　Implementing the military strategy of active defense. Strategically China pursues the defensive policy featuring self-defense and gaining mastery by striking only after the enemy has struck, and adheres to the principle: ``We will not attack unless we are attacked; if we are attacked, we will certainly counter-attack.'' China possesses a small number of nuclear weapons, entirely for meeting the needs of self-defense. China upholds the principle of self-defense by the whole people and the strategic concept of people's war, and works hard to enhance the defense consciousness of the whole people, perfect the defense mobilization system and intensify the building of the reserve force for defense. On the basis of its existing weaponry, China carries forward and develops its fine traditions. It seeks to adapt to profound changes in the world's military sphere, and makes proper preparations for defensive combat in the situation where modern technology, especially high technology, prevails. 

　　走有中国特色的精兵之路。在新的历史时期，中国军队努力加强质量建设，走有中国特色的精兵之路，目标是建设一支有中国特色的革命化、现代化、正规化的人民军队。减少数量，提高质量，是军队现代化建设的一条基本方针。中国军队依靠科技强军，实现军队由数量规模型向质量效能型、由人力密集型向科技密集型的转变；按照现代战争的特点，努力提高武器装备现代化建设的水平，改革和完善军队的体制编制，改进部队的训练和院校教育的内容与方法。

　　Streamlining the army the Chinese way. During the new historical period, the Chinese army is working hard to improve its quality and endeavoring to streamline the army the Chinese way, aiming to form a revolutionized, modernized and regularized people's army with Chinese characteristics. Reducing quantity and improving quality is a basic principle upon which the army is to be modernized. The Chinese army strengthens itself by relying on science and technology, and strives to make the transition from a numerically superior type to a qualitatively efficient type, and from a manpower-intensive type to a technology-intensive type. In view of the characteristics of modern wars, no effort will be spared to improve the modernization level of weaponry, reform and perfect the army system and setup, and improve the training of troops and curricula and teaching methods of military academies.

　　维护世界和平，反对侵略扩张行为。中国坚持和平共处五项原则，独立自主地处理对外军事关系，开展军事交流与合作，不搞霸权主义，不搞军事集团，不进行军事扩张，不在国外驻军或建立军事基地。中国反对军备竞赛，主张根据公正、合理、全面、均衡的原则，实行有效的军备控制和裁军。中国支持国际社会采取的有利于维护世界和地区和平、安全、稳定的活动，支持国际社会为公正合理地解决国际争端、军备控制和裁军问题所做的努力。

　　Safeguarding world peace, and opposing aggression and expansion. China upholds the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, and handles foreign military relations and engages in military exchanges and cooperation independently. China does not seek hegemonism, nor does it seek military blocs or military expansion. China does not station any troops or set up any military bases in any foreign country. China opposes the arms race, and maintains that effective arms control and disarmament should be carried out in accordance with the principles of fairness, rationality, comprehensiveness and balance. China supports the international community in its activities to promote world and regional peace, security and stability, and also in its efforts to fairly and rationally solve international disputes and to bring about arms control and disarmament.

　　国防建设

　　National Defense Construction  

　　中国的国防建设，是国家现代化建设的重要内容。在新的历史条件下，中国军队坚持中国共产党的绝对领导，贯彻积极防御的战略方针，加强质量建设，依法治军，勤俭建军，积极参加和支援国家经济建设，为国家的安全稳定和现代化建设作出了重大贡献。

　　China's national defense construction is an important part of its modernization program. Given the new historical conditions the Chinese army upholds the absolute leadership of the Communist Party of China (CPC), implements the strategic principle of active defense, emphasizes quality in army building, administrates the armed forces along legal lines, engages in army building through diligence and thrift, and actively participates in and supports national economic construction. As a result, it has made great contributions to the country's security, stability and modernization drive. 

　　国防体制

　　Defense System

　　中国根据宪法、国防法及其他有关法律，建立和完善国防体制。国家对国防活动实行统一的领导。

　　In accordance with the Constitution, the National Defense Law and other relevant laws, China has established and improved its national defense system. The state exercises unified leadership over defense-related activities. 

　　中华人民共和国全国人民代表大会是最高国家权力机关，决定战争和和平的问题，并行使宪法规定的国防方面的其他职权。全国人民代表大会常务委员会是全国人民代表大会的常设机关，决定战争状态的宣布，决定全国总动员或者局部动员，并行使宪法规定的国防方面的其他职权。国家主席根据全国人民代表大会的决定和全国人民代表大会常务委员会的决定，宣布战争状态，发布动员令，并行使宪法规定的国防方面的其他职权。国务院领导和管理国防建设事业。中央军事委员会领导并统一指挥全国武装力量。

　　The National People's Congress (NPC) of the PRC is the highest organ of state power. It decides on the questions of war and peace, and exercises other defense-related functions and powers provided for in the Constitution. The Standing Committee of the NPC is the NPC's permanent body. It decides on the proclamation of a state of war, decides on general or partial mobilization, and exercises other defense-related functions and powers provided for in the Constitution. The president of the state, in accordance with decisions of the NPC and its Standing Committee, proclaims a state of war, issues mobilization orders and exercises other defense-related functions and powers provided for in the Constitution. The State Council directs and administrates national defense work, and the Central Military Commission (CMC) directs and assumes unified command of the nation's armed forces. 

　　中国人民解放军实行中央军事委员会领导下的总参谋部、总政治部、总后勤部、总装备部体制。总参谋部负责组织领导全国武装力量的军事建设，组织指挥全国武装力量的军事行动。总政治部负责管理全军党的工作，组织进行政治工作。总后勤部负责组织领导全军后勤工作。总装备部负责组织领导全军武器装备建设工作。

　　The Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA) is organized in accordance with a system whereby the General Staff Department, the General Political Department, the General Logistics Department and the General Armament Department are placed under the leadership of the CMC. The General Staff Department organizes and leads the building-up of the nation's armed forces, and organizes and directs their military operations. The General Political Department administrates the army's Party work and organizes and conducts its political work. The General Logistics Department organizes and leads the army's logistics work. The General Armament Department organizes and leads the army's work in military equipment. 

　　中华人民共和国武装力量，由中国人民解放军现役部队和预备役部队、中国人民武装警察部队、民兵组成。中国人民解放军现役部队是国家的常备军，主要担负防卫作战任务，必要时可以依照法律规定协助维护社会秩序；预备役部队平时按照规定进行训练，必要时可以依照法律规定协助维护社会秩序，战时根据国家发布的动员令转为现役部队。中国人民武装警察部队担负国家赋予的安全保卫任务，维护社会秩序。民兵在军事机关的指挥下，担负战备勤务、防卫作战任务，协助维护社会秩序。中国人民解放军由陆军、海军、空军和第二炮兵组成，在全国范围内设立7个军区。

　　The armed forces of the PRC are composed of the PLA, both the active and reserve components, the Chinese People's Armed Police Force and the militia. The active components of the PLA comprise the state's standing army, which mainly undertakes the task of defensive combat, and helps to maintain social order, if necessary, according to law; reservists undergo military training in peacetime according to relevant regulations, and help to maintain social order, if necessary, according to law, and in wartime they shall be incorporated in the forces in active service in pursuance of the state's mobilization order. The Chinese People's Armed Police Force undertakes the tasks for maintenance of security and social order entrusted by the state. The militiamen, under the command of military organs, perform combat service support and defensive operations, and help to maintain social order. The PLA, comprised of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force and the Second Artillery Force, is organized in seven military area commands nationwide. 

　　国家对国防科研生产实行统一领导和计划调控。国务院负责领导和管理国防科研生产，管理国防经费和国防资产。中央军事委员会批准武装力量的武器装备体制和武器装备发展规划、计划，协同国务院领导和管理国防科研生产，会同国务院管理国防经费和国防资产。国家实行国家军事订货制度，保障武器装备和其他军用物资的采购供应。国家对国防经费实行财政拨款制度，并根据国防建设和经济建设的需要，确定国防资产的规模、结构和布局，调整和处分国防资产。

　　The state exercises unified leadership and planned control over defense research and production. The State Council leads and administrates defense research and production, as well as defense expenditure and assets. The CMC approves the military equipment system of the armed forces and military equipment development plans and programs, leads and administrates defense research and production in coordination with the State Council, and manages defense outlays and assets jointly with the State Council. The state practices a state military supplies order system to guarantee the acquisition of weapons and other war materials. The state practices a financial allocation system for defense spending. It decides the size, structure and location of the defense assets and the adjustment and disposal of these assets in accordance with the needs of national defense and economic construction. 

　　国务院和中央军事委员会共同领导动员准备和动员实施工作。国家在和平时期进行动员准备，将人民武装动员、国民经济动员、人民防空、国防交通等方面的动员准备纳入国家总体发展规划和计划，逐步完善动员体制，建立战略物资储备制度。国家重视开展国防教育，并将国防教育纳入国民经济和社会发展计划。

　　The State Council and the CMC jointly lead mobilization preparation and implementation work. In peacetime the state conducts mobilization preparation and integrates armed mobilization of the people, mobilization of the national economy, civil air defense, national defense transportation and other mobilization preparations into the state's overall development plan and program. It improves the mobilization system step by step, and establishes a strategic materials storage system. The state attaches importance to national defense education and conducts it in line with its plan for economic and social development. 
 
　　军事法制建设

　　Military Legislative Work

　　中国重视军事法制建设，把加强军事法制建设作为实现国防现代化和军队正规化的基本途径和重要保障。国家为适应新时期国防和军队建设的需要，确立了依法治军方针，全面加强军事法制建设，保障和推动中国的国防和军队建设沿着法制化轨道前进。

　　China attaches importance to the building of a military legal system, regarding the improvement of the work in this regard as a basic approach and important guarantee for realizing defense modernization and the regularization of the armed forces. In order to meet the needs of defense and army building in the new historical period, the state has laid down the principles for administrating the armed forces along legal lines. It has improved its military legislative work comprehensively to ensure that China's defense and army building advance along a legal track and to propel it in that direction. 

　　1982年后，中国在国家立法体制中进一步健全了军事立法体制，即全国人民代表大会及其常务委员会制定国防和军队建设的法律；中央军事委员会制定军事法规，或者与国务院联合制定军事行政法规；各总部、各军兵种、各军区制定军事规章，或者与国务院有关部门联合制定军事行政规章。中央军事委员会发布了《中国人民解放军立法程序暂行条例》，从立法规划、计划到法规起草、审议及发布实施，作了明确规定，实现了军事立法的规范化、制度化。

　　Since 1982 the military legislation system has been further fine-tuned as part of the state legislation system: The NPC and its Standing Committee have formulated laws on defense and army building; the CMC has formulated military laws and regulations, or jointly worked out military administrative laws and regulations with the State Council; all general departments, all services and arms and all military area commands of the PLA have drawn up military rules and regulations or jointly worked out military administrative rules and regulations with the relevant departments of the State Council. The Interim Regulations on Legislative Procedures of the PLA promulgated by the CMC contains clear-cut provisions on legislation programming and planning and the drafting, examination, promulgation and enforcement of laws and regulations, which embody the standardization and systemization of military legislation. 

　　10多年来，中国军事立法取得了显著成绩。全国人民代表大会及其常务委员会制定了《中华人民共和国国防法》、《中华人民共和国兵役法》、《中华人民共和国军事设施保护法》、《中华人民共和国人民防空法》、《中华人民共和国预备役军官法》、《中华人民共和国香港特别行政区驻军法》、《中国人民解放军现役军官服役条例》、《中国人民解放军军官军衔条例》等12件国防和军队建设的法律以及有关法律问题的决定。国务院、中央军事委员会制定了《国防交通条例》、《征兵工作条例》、《民兵工作条例》、《中国人民解放军现役士兵服役条例》等40多件军事行政法规。中央军事委员会制定了《中国人民解放军司令部条例》、《中国人民解放军政治工作条例》、《中国人民解放军后勤条例》、《中国人民解放军内务条令》、《中国人民解放军纪律条令》、《中国人民解放军队列条令》等70多件军事法规；各总部、各军兵种、各军区制定了1000多件军事规章。中国在国防和军队建设的主要方面基本实现了有法可依，初步建立起具有中国特色的军事法体系。中国军事立法在坚持符合本国国情、军情的同时，还注重与中国在国际军事领域已经加入的条约、协定相衔接，使军事法的内容与国际法准则和惯例相一致。

　　Over the past ten-odd years, remarkable achievements have been made in military legislation. The NPC and its Standing Committee have formulated 12 defense and army-building laws and legality-related decisions, including the National Defense Law of the PRC, Military Service Law of the PRC, Military Facilities Protection Law of the PRC, Civil Air Defense Law of the PRC, Law on the Reserve Officers of the PRC, the Garrison Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the PRC, Military Service Regulations Pertaining to PLA Officers in Active Service, and Regulations on the Military Ranks of PLA Officers. The State Council and the CMC have worked out 40-odd military administrative laws and regulations, such as the Regulations on National Defense Transportation, Regulations on Conscription Work, Regulations on Militia Work, and Military Service Regulations Pertaining to PLA Soldiers in Active Service. The CMC has formulated 70-odd military laws and regulations, including the Regulations of the PLA Headquarters, Regulations on Political Work in the PLA, Logistics Regulations of the PLA, Routine Service Regulations of the PLA, Discipline Regulations of the PLA, and Drill Regulations of the PLA. The various general departments, services and arms and military area commands have drawn up 1,000-some items of military rules and regulations. Now, China has laws to go by basically in the principal aspects of its defense and army building, as a military legal system with Chinese characteristics now is initially in place. While adhering to the principle of suiting military legislation to its national and military conditions, China also lays stress on bringing it into line with the international military-related treaties and agreements that China has acceded to, so as to make China's military laws consistent in content with international legal norms and practices. 

　　国家在国防建设领域，依法确立和健全了从中央到地方的国防领导体制和运行机制，建立了兵役制度、国防动员制度、国防科研生产制度、国防资产管理制度、军事设施保护制度以及军人抚恤优待制度等基本国防制度;在军队建设领域，依法确立了军队的性质、任务和建设方针，实行了军人衔级制度、军事训练制度、司令部工作制度、政治工作制度、后勤保障制度、警备勤务制度、军纪奖惩制度等一系列重要制度，保障了国防活动和军队建设在法律的规范和调控下有序地进行。

　　In the sphere of national defense construction, China has set up and improved its defense leading system and operating mechanism at both the central and local levels in accordance with the law, together with basic national defense systems and institutions, such as those of military service, mobilization, research and production, assets management and military facilities protection, as well as those of giving special care to the bereaved families of servicemen. In the area of army building, the principles defining the nature, tasks and building of the armed forces have been determined in accordance with the law, and a series of important systems and institutions are in operation, such as those of military ranks and insignia, military training, headquarters work, political work, logistic support, garrison service, and military discipline-related rewards and penalties, which ensure that national defense activities and army building can be carried out in an orderly manner, within a legal framework and along a regulatory line. 

　　为了保证国家有关法律、法规在军队的统一实施，国家在军队中建立了军事执法体制、军事司法体制和军事法制机构、法律服务组织，构成了比较完整的军事法制组织体制。军事执法体制，主要由负责军事法实施的军队各级领导机关和职能部门构成，并在军级以上单位设立了履行执法监督检查职能的纪律检查机构和财务审计机构，全国大、中城市驻军建立了纠察处理违纪军人、违章军车的警备勤务机构。军事司法体制，由国家设在中国人民解放军、军区级单位、军级单位的三级军事法院和军事检察院构成，它们与军队各级保卫部门分别行使法律规定的职权，依法办理军队内部发生的刑事案件。军事法制机构，由中央军委法制局和各总部、各军兵种、各军区编设的法制机构或人员组成，负责管理全军和军队各单位的法制工作。法律服务组织，由军队各级设立的法律顾问处和法律咨询站组成，专门为军队各级领导机关决策和部队官兵的涉法问题提供法律咨询和服务。1997年底，中国军队中的法律顾问处达到240多个，律师1360多人，基层法律咨询站达到4250多个，法律咨询员65700多人。

　　In order to guarantee the unified implementation of the nation's relevant laws and regulations in the armed forces, the state has established mechanisms of military law enforcement and military judicature, military legal institutions and legal service organizations, forming a fairly complete military legal system in the armed forces. The military-law enforcement system is mainly formed of relevant leading organs and functional departments at various levels. Besides, discipline inspection organs and financial auditing organs have been set up in units at and above the corps level, which carry out supervision and inspection over law enforcement, and garrison service organs in garrison units in large and medium-sized cities, which check, inspect and handle cases of infringements of military discipline by military personnel as well as cases of violations of relevant rules by military vehicles. The military judicial system is composed of military courts and procuratorates established by the state at the three levels of the PLA, the military area command and the corps, which, together with the PLA's security departments at various levels, exercise their respective functions and powers and handle criminal cases involving military personnel in accordance with the law. The military legal system is composed of the legal organs or personnel authorized by the Bureau of Legislative Affairs of the CMC, the various general departments, services and arms and military areas commands, and are in charge of the legal work of the entire PLA as well as the various army units. The legal service organizations are composed of legal advice offices and legal counseling stations of the army units at various levels, which provide legal advice and services to help leading military organs at various levels to make decisions as well as for individual officers and men. By the end of 1997, over 240 legal advice offices with more than 1,360 lawyers had been set up by the PLA units, in addition to more than 4,250 legal counseling stations with 65,700-some legal consultants at the grassroots level.

　　中国重视在军队开展法制宣传教育，把法制宣传教育纳入部队教育训练的轨道。为增强官兵的法律素质，根据国家关于在全体公民中进行法制宣传教育的统一部署，1986年至1995年中国军队连续开展了两个五年普法教育活动。1996年初，中国军队开始第三个五年普法教育。

　　China attaches importance to promoting publicity and education in the law in the armed forces, bringing it into the orbit of the army's regular education and training. In order to equip officers and men with knowledge of the law in accordance with the state's unified plan on publicity and education in the law for all citizens, the Chinese armed forces carried out two sessions of the Five-Year Legal Education Program from 1986 to 1995. The Third Five-Year Legal Education Program started early in 1996. 

　　国防费

　　Defense Expenditure 

　　中国一贯注重合理的国防费规模，根据国防需要和财力可能，按照综合平衡的原则安排国防费用。改革开放以来，为集中力量进行经济建设，中国政府严格控制国防支出，国防费一直处于较低的水平。

　　China has always stressed rationally scaled expenditure on defense. The costs of defense are allocated based on the needs of defense and the country's financial capacities and the principle of overall balance. Since the introduction of the policies of reform and opening to the outside world, the Chinese government has strictly controlled its defense expenditure at a comparatively low level so that it can concentrate on economic construction. 

　　中国政府对国防费始终坚持严格控制、严格管理、严格监督的原则，建立健全了完善的管理体制和法规制度。国防费预算、决算由全国人民代表大会审查批准。国家和军队的审计机关对预算的执行过程实施严格审计监督。

　　The Chinese government has consistently stuck to the principle of strict control, strict management and strict supervision of defense spending; it has established and perfected a complete administrative and regulatory system. China's defense budget and final accounts are examined and approved by the NPC, and the state and army's auditing organs exercise strict audit and supervision of the execution of the budget. 

　　按支出项目分，中国国防费包括：人员生活费，主要用于军官、士兵、文职干部和职工的工资、伙食、服装等；活动维持费，主要用于部队训练、工程设施建设及维护和日常消耗性支出；装备费，主要用于武器装备的科研、试验、采购、维修、运输和储存等。按保障范围，既包括现役部队，又包括民兵、预备役部队，并负担了相当一部分社会性支出，主要用于部分退役军官的供养，军队子弟学校、幼儿园，培养军地两用人才，支援国家经济建设和参加抢险救灾。

　　China's expenditure on national defense falls into the following categories: personnel expenses, mainly including pay, food and clothing of military and non-military personnel; costs for maintenance of activities, mainly including military training, construction and maintenance of facilities and running expenses; and costs for equipment, including research and experimentation, procurement, maintenance, transportation and storage. In terms of the scope of logistic support, these expenditures cover not only active service personnel, but also militia and reserve requirements. In addition, a large amount of spendings are used to fund activities associated with social welfare, mainly pensions for some of the retired officers, schools and kindergartens for children of military personnel, training personnel competent for both military and civilian services, supporting national economic construction, and participation in emergency rescues and disaster relief efforts. 

　　勤俭建军、艰苦奋斗是中国军队的优良传统。中国军队除开展清仓利库和修旧利废等群众性节约活动外，还从事一些力所能及的农副工业生产和经营活动，主要目的是为了安排随军家属和子女就业，改善基层部队官兵的物质文化生活。

　　Plain living and hard working is a fine tradition of the Chinese armed forces. China's military personnel have launched a sequence of mass movements for practicing economy, such as conducting checkups of warehouses to make better use of the stored goods and repairing or utilizing old or discarded things. They have also done everything they can to join in agricultural and sideline production or engage in business, mainly for the purpose of providing employment for dependents of military personnel and improving the material and cultural lives of officers and men in grassroots units. 

　　改革开放以来，中国政府坚持国防建设服从和服务于国家经济建设的大局，较大幅度地减少了国防投入。1979年至1994年的16年间，国防费的绝对值年平均增长6.22%，与同期全国商品零售价格总指数年平均上涨7.3%相比，实际负增长1.08%。

　　Since the introduction of the policies of reform and opening to the outside world the Chinese government has placed work in national defense in a position subordinate to and in the service of overall national economic construction and has made relatively major reductions in defense inputs. From 1979 to 1994 defense spending increased by 6.22 percent annually in absolute terms, which represented in real terms a negative growth of 1.08 percent compared to the 7.3 percent annual increase of the general retail price index of commodities in the same period. 

　　1995年至1997年，中国年度国防费分别为636.72亿元、720.06亿元和812.57亿元人民币。年度国防费的增加，主要是在社会经济发展和城乡居民人均收入提高的情况下，保证军队人员的生活水平能够同步提高，官兵的生存生活条件得到改善。即使这样，这期间的国防费占同期国家财政支出的比例也在逐年下降，分别为9.3%、9.1%和8.8%。

　　China's annual defense outlay from 1995 to 1997 came to RMB 63.672, 72.006 and 81.257 billion yuan, respectively. The annual increase in defense outlay went for the most part to ensure that the living standards of military personnel keep up with the nation's social and economic development and with the increase of the per capita incomes of urban and rural residents, so as to improve the living conditions of officers and men. Even so, defense spending in the total state expenditure declined annually in the same period, accounting for 9.3, 9.1 and 8.8 percent respectively. 

　　1997年度中国国防费的构成为（图表1）：人员生活费291.62亿元人民币，占35.89%;活动维持费265.36亿元人民币，占32.66%;装备费255.59亿元人民币，占31.45%。从上述构成可以看出，国防费的大部分用于人员生活和正常活动维持，而且还负担了40多亿元人民币的社会性支出，约占年度国防费的5%。

　　The composition of China's defense expenditure in 1997 (Table 1) was as follows: 29.162 billion yuan for personnel expenses, accounting for 35.89 percent; 26.536 billion yuan for maintenance of activities, 32.66 percent; and 25.559 billion yuan for equipment, 31.45 percent. From the above, we can see that most of the defense outlay went to the personnel's living costs and maintenance of normal activities. In addition, more than four billion yuan, or about 5 percent, was spent to fund activities associated with social welfare. 

与世界其他一些国家国防支出相比，中国国防支出的总体水平是比较低的（图表2）。

　　Compared with the defense expenditures of some other countries, China has a fairly low level of defense spending (Table 2).

按人民币对美元的汇价计算，1997年中国国防费仅为98亿美元，只相当于美国的3.67%、俄罗斯的61.25%、英国的27.53%、法国的26.7%、日本的22.79%、韩国的56.98%。
Based on the above exchange rate, China's defense expenditure in 1997 was US$ 9.80 billion, which was 3.67 percent of the USA's, 61.25 percent of Russia's, 27.53 percent of Britain's, 26.7 percent of France's, 22.79 percent of Japan's, and 56.98 percent of the Republic of Korea's (ROK).

　　中国国防支出的低水平，不仅反映在国防费的绝对值上，而且也反映在国家国防负担的相对比例上。近20年来，中国国防费占国内生产总值的比例一直在下降（图表3）。

　　China's defense expenditure is low in relative terms, as well as in absolute terms. In the past two decades the percentage of China's defense expenditure in the gross domestic product (GDP) has declined successively (Table 3). 

　　与美国、俄罗斯、英国、法国、日本、韩国等国家相比，中国国防负担的相对比例也是较低的（图表4）。

　　Compared with the USA, Russia, Britain, France, Japan and the ROK, China has a comparatively low burden of defense expenditure (Table 4).

裁减军队员额
Reducing Military Personnel

1997年9月，中国庄严宣布：中国军队在80年代裁减军队员额100万的基础上，将在今后3年内再裁减军队员额50万。这一单方面裁军的重大战略决策，再一次充分表明了中国热爱和平的真诚愿望，是中国为推动进一步降低世界军备水平，增强相互信任，促进人类和平事业所作的新的努力。

In September 1997 China solemnly announced that it would reduce the number of its military personnel by 500,000 within the coming three years on the basis of its disarmament move in the 1980s, which had cut the number by one million. This important strategic decision of unilateral disarmament once again fully expressed China's genuine wish for peace. It was a new effort made by China to further promote the lowering of the world's armament level, increase mutual trust and advance the cause of peace for humanity.

中国奉行防御性的国防政策，中国军队的数量与规模始终控制在维护国家安全需要和国力许可的范围以内。中华人民共和国成立后，分别在1955年和1958年进行了两次较大规模的裁军行动。80年代中期，中国军队建设的指导思想实行战略性转变，从过去随时准备应付大规模侵略战争转变到和平时期建设的轨道上来，军队的规模和体制编制也进行了相应的调整。1985年，中国政府决定单方面裁减军队员额100万，至1990年实际裁减103.9万人。1990年后，中国人民解放军经过陆续调整，其规模进一步缩小。再次裁减员额50万后，中国人民解放军总规模将保持250万人。

Adhering to the defensive policy for national security, China has always controlled the numbers and size of its armed forces within the limit allowed by the national strength and necessary to maintain state security. After the founding of the PRC in 1949, China undertook two disarmament steps -- one in 1955 and the other in 1958. In the mid-1980s China's guideline for army building was strategically shifted from all-time preparedness against a large-scale war of aggression to peacetime construction, and the size and structure of the armed forces were adjusted accordingly. In 1985 the government decided unilaterally to cut its troops by one million men in real terms. By 1990, the total reduction had reached 1.039 million men. Since 1990 the size of the PLA has further shrunk through successive adjustments. When the drawdown of 500,000 has been completed the total size of the PLA will be 2.5 million men.

　　与世界多数国家的做法不同，中国把边海防部队、兵役动员机构、农副业生产管理机构、文职人员，以及预备役部队中的现役人员，均计入中国人民解放军的总定额。

　　Different from many other countries, China includes all its border and coastal defense forces, military service mobilization organs, administration organs of military-run agricultural and sideline productions, civil cadres and active service personnel in the reserve service forces in the overall strength of the PLA.

　　中国此次裁军，将在3年内按计划、分步骤、积极稳妥地进行。其中，陆军拟裁减19%，海军拟裁减11.6%，空军拟裁减11%。在精简员额的同时，将优化结构，调整编组，理顺关系，走质量建军、科技强军的道路，把中国军队现代化建设提高到一个新水平。

　　China's latest disarmament move will be carried out actively and steadily, and completed within the planned three years. The reductions in the land, naval and air forces account for 19 percent, 11.6 percent and 11 percent respectively. While the numbers of men are being reduced, steps are being taken in tandem to optimize the structure, adjust the composition and intra-relationship, and enhance the competence of the armed forces by enhancing their scientific and technological knowledge, so as to raise the modernization of the Chinese armed forces to a new level.

　　参加和支援国家建设

　　Participating in and Supporting National Construction

参加和支援国家建设，是宪法赋予中国军队的一项重要任务，也是人民军队全心全意为人民服务根本宗旨的体现。
Participating in and supporting the country's construction is an important task entrusted by the Constitution to the Chinese armed forces, and a reflection of the fundamental purpose of the people's army -- to serve the people wholeheartedly. 

80年代以来，中国军队在完成教育训练任务的同时，积极参加和支援国家经济建设，为国家的繁荣和发展作出了重要贡献。
Since the 1980s, while fulfilling its education and training tasks, the Chinese army has taken an active part in and fully supported the nation's economic construction, and through this it has made significant contributions to the country's prosperity and development.

　　腾让、开放军事设施。中国军队在大量裁减员额的同时，向地方腾让、开放部分军事设施，支援国家建设事业。近20年来，军队先后向地方开放101个机场，开放和腾让29个港口码头、300多条铁路专用线、90条通信线路、1000多个仓库、300多万平方米军事用地及部分营房设施。

　　Turning military facilities over to the public or converting them to civilian use. While cutting down large numbers of personnel, the Chinese armed forces have transferred part of their military facilities to local authorities or opened them to the public to support the country's construction. Over the past 20 years China's armed forces have opened 101 airports to the public, and opened or surrendered 29 harbors and docks, more than 300 special railway lines, 90 telecommunications lines, 1,000-some warehouses and over three million square meters of land on former military reserves and some barracks facilities.

参加抢险救灾。
Participating in emergency rescues and disaster relief work. 
中国幅员辽阔，每年都有局部地区发生自然灾害。
China has a vast territory, and local natural disasters are frequent. 
每当灾情发生，军队总是挺身而出，奋勇保护人民生命安全，抢救国家和人民财产。近20年来，全军共参加抢险救灾10万多次，出动官兵2300多万人次，机械车辆100多万台次，飞机、舰艇1.5万余架（艘）次，抢救遇险群众1000多万人，抢运各类物资2亿多吨。
Whenever a natural disaster occurs, the armed forces are always in the forefront of efforts to protect the people's lives and save the state and people's property. Over the past two decades they have participated in emergency rescues and disaster reliefs on more than 100,000 occasions. They have mobilized more than 23 million men, and organized more than one million vehicle trips, and some 15,000 plane and ship journeys to save more than 10 million people and transport more than 200 million tons of materials out of perilous conditions.

参加国家和地方的重点工程建设。
Participating in the construction of key national and local projects. 
中国军队参加了国家和地方的许多重点工程建设，并担负急难险重任务。
The armed forces have participated in the construction of many key national and local projects and undertaken urgent, difficult and dangerous tasks connected with them. 
近20年来，全军共投入4亿多个劳动日，出动机械车辆2500万台次，参加和支援重点工程项目1万多项。主要有铁路、高速公路和地铁工程150多项，隧道、涵洞340多个，桥梁260多座，公路、铁路4100多公里，码头50多个，民用、军民合用机场40多个，能源工程500多项，水利工程2000余项，通信光缆工程2万余公里，经济技术开发区和旅游开发区建设500多个。
In the past two decades they have devoted more than 400 million work days and organized 25 million vehicle trips to participate in and support 10,000-odd key projects, including 150 railway, expressway and underground railway projects, 340 tunnels and culverts, 260 bridges, 4,100 kilometers of highways and railways, 50 docks, 40 civil and military-civil airports, 500 energy projects, 2,000 water conservancy projects, 20,000 kilometers of optical cable telecommunication lines and 500 economic and technological development and tourism development projects.

发挥人才技术优势，开展科技助民。
Bringing the superiority of talented personnel and technology into full play and assisting people with the use of science and technology. 
军队院校和科研、医疗单位，以及专业技术部队，采取转让科技成果、协助技术攻关、帮助培训人才等方法，积极为国家建设服务。
Military academies, scientific research and medical units, as well as special technological units actively support national construction by transferring scientific and technological findings to the civilian sector or by offering it assistance in tackling key technical problems and personnel training. 
10年来，军队以高新科技成果支援国家经济建设项目1000多个，解决国家急需的科研攻关项目150多个，向社会转让科技成果1万多项，培训各类科技人员近百万人，帮助地方企业技术改造900多项，使320家面临困境的企业扭亏为盈。
In the last ten years China's armed forces have supported more than 1,000 national economic construction projects with their advanced scientific and technological achievements, solved urgent and key problems for more than 150 scientific research projects, transferred 10,000-some scientific and technological findings to the civilian sector, trained nearly one million scientific and technological personnel, and helped civilian enterprises complete 900-odd technical transformation projects which enabled 320 enterprises to get out of the red and become profitable.

支援农业和扶贫开发工作。
Supporting agriculture and assisting in poverty-relief and development efforts. 
中国是一个农业大国，农业始终是国民经济的基础。
China is a large agricultural country, so agriculture has always been the foundation of China's national economy. 
为了支持农业发展，近10年来，军队疏通河道500多条，修筑水渠、堤坝20多万公里，兴修水库上千座，开荒造田和平整土地200多万公顷，为农业丰产打下了基础。驻贫困地区的部队，大力帮助当地群众发展生产，累计建立扶贫帮困点2.3万个，扶助近百万人口脱贫致富，军队集中力量支援了沂蒙山、太行山等20个重点地区的扶贫开发，帮助贫困地区创办乡镇企业3500多家，实施科技扶贫项目1.2万余个，培训农业科技人员450多万人次。各级医疗机构和驻军医院，向贫困地区累计派出医疗队860队次，对口扶持乡镇医院8100多所，支援医疗设备价值2000多万元，义务培训医务人员2万多人。
In the past decade, to support agricultural development China's armed forces have dredged more than 500 rivers, built 200,000-odd kilometers of irrigation channels and dams and dikes, dug more than 1,000 reservoirs, and reclaimed wasteland and leveled land of over two million hectares, thus laying a foundation for bumper harvests. Army units stationed in poverty-stricken areas have made great efforts to assist the local people to develop production, up to now helping nearly one million people in 23,000 poor areas get rid of poverty and live more comfortable lives. Especially, they have concentrated on helping the poor in 20 key areas in the Yimeng and Taihang mountains and other regions, assisting them to run 3,500-some village and township enterprises. Moreover, they have carried out 12,000 scientific and technological projects aimed at helping the poor to get rid of poverty, and offered agro-technique training courses to some 4.5 million people. Military medical organizations at various levels and army hospitals have sent medical teams to poor areas on 860 occasions, which have supported more than 8,100 township hospitals with medical equipment worth upwards of 20 million yuan, and given free training to more than 20,000 medical personnel.

参加社会公益事业建设。
Participating in work for the public good. 
近10年来，军队先后投入1亿多个劳动日，帮助修桥补路、整治美化环境、修建供水供气供电工程等公益建设事业，共达10万余项，植树4亿多株。向希望工程捐款4157.55万元，捐赠各类物资价值1100多万元，援建各类“希望小学”697所，直接帮助11.5万多名失学儿童重返校园。
In the past decade the PLA has devoted more than 100 million work days to the repair of bridges and roads, the tidying up and beautifying of the environment, and the repair and construction of water, gas and power supply projects. Altogether, it has completed over 100,000 projects for the public good and planted more than 400 million trees. Besides, it has contributed 41.5755 million yuan to the ``Hope Project,'' together with various kinds of goods and materials worth some 11 million yuan, and helped to build 697 ``Hope'' primary schools, which have enabled more than 115,000 dropouts to return to school.

培养军地两用人才。
Training personnel competent both for military and civilian services.
中国军队注重为国家经济建设事业造就和输送合格人才。
The Chinese armed forces pay great attention to training qualified personnel for the country's economic construction. 
根据国家经济建设的需要和官兵的愿望，《中国人民解放军内务条令》专门规定每周六可用于集体组织两用人才培训和科学文化学习。自80年代初中国军队开始有组织地开展培养军地两用人才工作以来，全军共有近百万名军官通过在职学习获得大专以上学历;85%以上的士兵在服役期间接受了多种民用技术培训，其中近半数获得技术等级证书。他们在退出现役后，成为加强国家经济建设和促进社会全面进步的一支重要力量。
To meet the needs of national economic construction and the wishes of both officers and men, the Routine Service Regulations of the PLA stipulate that every Saturday may be reserved for training personnel competent for both military and civilian services. Saturdays are also when military personnel are organized to study scientific and cultural subjects. Since the early 1980s, when the PLA started to organize these special training courses, through on-the-job training nearly one million officers have received academic certificates at or above the junior college level; more than 85 percent of the ordinary soldiers have received in-service technical training, and nearly half of them have been awarded technician's certificates of various grades. When they leave active service they have become or will become an important force promoting the country's economic construction and the overall progress of Chinese society.

驻军香港
Stationing a Garrison in Hong Kong

1997年7月1日，中国政府恢复对香港行使主权，中国人民解放军驻香港部队开始担负香港特别行政区的防务。
The Chinese government resumed sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1, 1997, and stationed a garrison of the PLA in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) to take charge of its defense affairs. 
中国人民解放军驻香港部队进驻香港，是中国政府恢复对香港行使主权的重要标志，是维护国家主权和安全，保持香港长期繁荣稳定的重要保证。
The stationing of the PLA troops in the Region is an important symbol of the Chinese government's resumption of exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong. It is also an important guarantee for the preservation of state sovereignty and security and the maintenance of the Region's long-term prosperity and stability.

中国人民解放军进驻香港，严格遵循了法律规定。
The PLA troops entered Hong Kong strictly in accordance with provisions of the law. 
1990年4月，第七届全国人民代表大会第三次会议通过的《中华人民共和国香港特别行政区基本法》，明确规定中央人民政府负责管理香港特别行政区的防务，并派部队进驻香港。1996年12月，第八届全国人民代表大会常务委员会第二十三次会议通过《中华人民共和国香港特别行政区驻军法》。1997年7月1日，该法正式施行。香港驻军法规定，香港驻军不干预香港特别行政区的地方事务;香港驻军的任务是，担负防卫勤务，管理军事设施，办理有关的涉外军事事宜，确保香港的安全稳定;香港驻军的费用由中央人民政府负担;香港驻军实行人员轮换制度。香港驻军法还对驻军人员的义务与纪律以及司法管辖等问题作了规定。这就从根本上保障了香港驻军依法履行防务职责。
The Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the PRC, passed at the Third Session of the Seventh NPC in April, 1990, clearly stipulated that the Central People's Government shall be responsible for administrating the defense affairs of the HKSAR. The Garrison Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the PRC was approved at the 23rd meeting of the Standing Committee of the Eighth NPC in December 1996, and came into effect on July 1, 1997. The Garrison Law stipulates that the Hong Kong Garrison shall not interfere in the local affairs of the HKSAR; that its duties are to perform routine defense service, administrate military facilities, handle relevant foreign-related military affairs, and ensure the security and stability of Hong Kong; that its expenditures shall be borne by the Central People's Government; and that the garrison troops shall be rotated. The law contains specific provisions on the duties and rules of discipline of the garrison personnel, the judicature and other questions, fundamentally guaranteeing that the Hong Kong Garrison fulfils its defense functions along legal lines.

中国人民解放军驻香港部队由陆军、海军和空军部队组成，隶属中华人民共和国中央军事委员会领导。
The PLA Hong Kong Garrison, composed of ground, naval and air forces, is under the direction of the Central Military Commission of the PRC. 
驻香港部队遂行防务，必须遵守全国性的法律和香港特别行政区的法律，执行中国人民解放军现行的条令条例和规章制度。
While performing its defense duties, the Hong Kong Garrison must abide by both national and HKSAR laws, as well as the current rules and regulations of the PLA.

中国人民解放军驻香港部队进驻香港之后，严格遵守香港基本法和香港驻军法，坚持依法履行防务职责，积极组织部队训练，加强部队正规化建设，学习香港的有关法律，使官兵熟悉香港的社会情况。
After its entry into Hong Kong, the PLA Hong Kong Garrison abided strictly by the Basic Law and the Garrison Law, fulfilled its defense duties within legal framework, actively organized military training, strengthened army-building along regularization lines, studied Hong Kong's related laws, and acquainted the rank and file with the social conditions in Hong Kong. 
按照香港驻军法的规定，与香港特区政府建立了工作联系，向香港社会开放了昂船洲、赤柱两处军事营地，供香港同胞参观，增强了香港市民对驻香港部队的了解和信任。
According to the Garrison Law, the Garrison established working contacts with the HKSAR government, and opened the barracks on the Stonecutters Island and Chek Chu to the public to promote Hong Kong compatriots' understanding of and trust in the garrison troops.

中国人民解放军驻香港部队履行香港防务职责，是一项长期的任务。
It is a long-term task for the PLA Hong Kong Garrison to fulfil its responsibility for Hong Kong's defense affairs. 
驻香港部队将始终遵循“一国两制”的方针，严格遵守香港基本法和香港驻军法，为确保香港的长期繁荣稳定作出贡献。
The garrison troops will consistently adhere to the principle of "one country, two systems" strictly abide by the Basic Law and the Garrison Law, and contribute to the preservation of the long-term prosperity and stability of Hong Kong.

国际安全合作
International Security Cooperation 
 
　　中国作为联合国安理会常任理事国和亚太大国，高度重视并积极参与国际安全合作，坚持原则、信守承诺、以诚相待、注重友谊、发展合作。近年来，中国在相互平等、互利互惠的基础上，积极开展与外国军队之间的交流。中国还积极参与亚太地区的多边及双边安全对话与合作，以及联合国维持和平行动，为维护世界和地区的和平发挥应有作用。
      
　　As a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council and a large country in the Asia-Pacific region, China attaches great importance to, and takes an active part in, international security cooperation by sticking to its principles and promises, treating others in a sincere and friendly way, and developing cooperation. In recent years, China has actively carried out exchanges with foreign armed forces on the basis of mutual equality and mutual benefit. China has also actively participated in multilateral and bilateral security dialogues and cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region, as well as in United Nations peace-keeping operations, playing its due part in keeping peace in the region and the world as a whole.

　　对外军事交往

　　Foreign Military Contacts

对外军事交往是中国总体外交的一个重要组成部分，服从和服务于国防和军队现代化建设。
As an important component of China's overall diplomacy, China's foreign military contacts are subordinate to and serve the modernization of national defense and the armed forces. 
中国坚持在和平共处五项原则基础上，独立自主地处理对外军事关系，开展军事交流与合作。
China insists on dealing with its foreign military relations independently and engaging in military exchanges and cooperation based on the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. 
中国在对外军事交往中，一贯主张互相尊重、增进了解、发展友谊、互利合作。
In its contacts with foreign military circles, China has always advocated the principles of mutual respect, enhancing understanding, developing friendship, mutual benefit and cooperation. 
中国军队积极参与多边军事外交活动，充分发挥中国军队在处理国际军事事务中的积极作用。
Chinese armed forces have been active in participating in multilateral military diplomatic activities to bring the positive role of the Chinese armed forces into full play in the sphere of international military affairs.

　　中国积极开展全方位、多层次的军事外交。目前中国军队已同世界上100多个国家的军队建立了联系，在90多个驻外使馆中设立了武官处，在中国设立武官处的国家已达60多个。近20年来，中国派出了1300多个军事代表团组访问了80多个国家，其中军队高级官员率团出访180多批。来访的外国军队代表团组2100多个，数万人次，其中外国的国防部长、三军总司令、总参谋长等高级代表团占一半以上。

　　China has been active in developing an omni-directional and multi-level form of military diplomacy. So far, Chinese armed forces have established relations with the armed forces of more than 100 other countries. China has set up military attach*)_*'s offices in more than 90 Chinese embassies abroad, and some 60 countries have set up their military attach's offices in China. In the last 20 years, more than 1,300 Chinese military delegations, of which some 180 were headed by senior officers, have visited over 80 countries. In the meantime, 2,100-some foreign military delegations involving several tens of thousands of persons have visited China, more than half of which were high-ranking delegations headed by defense ministers, commanders-in-chief of the armed forces or chiefs of the general staff.

　　中国始终把发展同周边国家的军事交往置于突出地位，遵循睦邻友好、互利合作、长期稳定的方针，与周边国家军队开展了大量有益的交往，特别是高层交往。仅1996年、1997年两年，中国军队就派出100余批代表团相继访问了周边大多数国家，同时接待了周边国家的军事代表团130余批。中国特别注重与发展中国家的友好军事交流与合作，曾先后向70多个国家提供人员培训、装备器材、医疗卫生等方面的援助。1973年以来，为发展中国家军队培训各级指挥和专业技术人员近万名，向发展中国家派出专家8000多名。中国积极发展与美国、欧洲等西方国家的军事关系，从维护世界和平和各国人民的根本利益出发，本着加强对话、减少分歧的原则，陆续恢复和改善了中国军队与上述国家军队的关系，加深了相互了解。

　　China has always placed the development of military contacts with adjacent countries in a prominent position. Following the principles of good-neighborliness and friendliness, mutual benefit and cooperation and long-term stability, it has developed extensive and beneficial contacts with the armed forces of those countries, especially contacts on the senior level. In 1996 and 1997 alone, China sent more than 100 military delegations to most of its adjacent countries, and hosted over 130 military delegations from such countries. China has placed special stress on friendly military exchanges and cooperation with developing countries, and has offered assistance in personnel training, equipment and health care to over 70 countries. Since 1973, China has trained nearly 10,000 officers at all levels as well as military technicians for developing countries, and sent over 8,000 experts to those countries. China is enthusiastic for expanding military relations with the United States and other Western countries in Europe. Proceeding from the objective of safeguarding world peace and the fundamental interests of the people all over the world, Chinese armed forces have successively resumed and improved their relations with the armed forces of those countries on the principle of increasing dialogue and narrowing differences, resulting in the deepening of mutual understanding.

　　90年代以来，中国海军舰艇编队出访了近20个国家。其中，中国海军两支舰艇编队于1997年3月至5月分别对美国、墨西哥、智利、秘鲁以及泰国、菲律宾、马来西亚进行了友好访问，增进了中国军队与上述国家军队和人民的友谊。

　　Since the beginning of the 1990s China's naval vessels have visited nearly a score of countries. From March to May 1997, two formations of Chinese naval vessels made friendly visits to the United States, Mexico, Chile, Peru, Thailand, the Philippines and Malaysia, which have enhanced the friendship between the armed forces of China and the armed forces and people of those countries.

　　中国军队在对外交往中，注重开展专业技术交流，在科研、学术、军事教育、军队管理、文化体育、医疗卫生等许多领域同世界各国军队进行了广泛的交流与合作。

　　In their foreign contacts, Chinese armed forces stress technological exchanges in specialized fields. They have developed extensive exchanges and cooperation with armed forces in other parts of the world in the fields of scientific research, academic studies, military education, armed forces administration, culture, sports, and medical and hygiene work.

　　中国军队积极活跃的对外军事交往，促进了中国军队同世界各国军队的相互了解和信任。走向国际社会的中国军队向世界展示了中国军队文明之师、和平之师的形象，在维护世界和地区和平中作出了应有的贡献。

　　The positive, extensive foreign military contacts on the part of the Chinese armed forces have promoted mutual understanding and trust between the PLA and other armed forces. The Chinese armed forces, which have gone among the international community, have presented themselves before the world as a civilized force and a force of peace, a force which has made its due contributions to keeping regional peace and peace throughout the world.

　　建立信任措施

　　Promoting Confidence-Building Measures

　　国家间建立信任是维护安全的有效途径，中国高度重视并积极推动建立信任措施合作。近年来，中国与有关邻国达成了一些边境地区建立信任措施和边境裁军协定，这是中国致力于国家关系的发展和地区和平稳定的重要举措。这些协定反映了中国所积极倡导的新型安全观念，体现了一些对亚太安全对话与合作具有普遍意义的原则和精神，包括：相互同等安全；通过建立相互信任和对话合作谋求安全，安全合作不干涉别国内政、不针对第三国；军事力量不得威胁或损害他国的安全与稳定；实行和坚持防御性国防政策；在双边基础上，在边境和争议地区采取适宜的信任措施；军事力量友好交往等。

　　China places great stress on and actively promotes cooperation in confidence-building measures (CBM), considering the establishment of mutual trust between nations as an effective way to maintain security. In recent years, China has reached agreements with some neighboring countries on confidence-building measures and reduction of military forces in border areas, which is an important step China has taken to develop relations with other countries and promote regional peace and stability. These agreements reflect a new kind of security concept vigorously advocated by China and embody some principles and spirit of universal significance for Asian-Pacific security dialogues and cooperation. These include mutual and equal security; seeking security by establishing mutual trust, dialogue and cooperation without interfering in the internal affairs of other countries and without aiming at a third party; preventing military forces from threatening or harming other countries' security and stability; implementing and sticking to a national defense policy that is defensive in nature; adopting suitable confidence-building measures in border and disputed areas on a bilateral basis; and engaging in friendly contacts between military forces.

　　1996年4月，中国与俄罗斯、哈萨克斯坦、吉尔吉斯斯坦、塔吉克斯坦签署《关于在边境地区加强军事领域信任的协定》，规定：部署在边境地区的军事力量互不进攻对方；不进行针对对方的军事演习；限制军事演习规模、范围和次数；相互通报边界线两侧各100公里区域内的重要军事活动；邀请对方观察实兵演习；预防危险军事活动；加强双方边境地区军队之间的友好交往等。

　　In April 1996, China and Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan signed the Agreement on Confidence-Building in the Military Field Along the Border Areas, which stipulates that military forces deployed in the border areas shall not be used to attack each other; each party shall refrain from staging military exercises directing against the other; there shall be restrictions on the military exercises in terms of scale, area and the number of such exercises; all the important military activities of one party in the areas between the border and 100 kilometers from the border line shall be notified to the other which shall be invited to observe the troop exercises; measures shall be taken to prevent dangerous military activities and enhance friendly exchanges of their armed forces in the border areas.

　　1996年11月，中国与印度签署《关于在边境实际控制线地区军事领域建立信任措施的协定》，规定：不进行威胁对方或损害边境地区和平、安宁与稳定的任何军事活动;在边界问题最终解决前，严格尊重和遵守中印边境地区的实际控制线，任何一方的活动不得超过实际控制线；按共同商定的最高限额裁减或限制部署在实际控制线地区共同商定的地理范围内的陆军、边防部队、准军事部队，以及其他双方同意的武装力量和部分武器装备；不在实际控制线附近地区举行针对对方的军事演习，限制军事演习规模，通报实际控制线附近地区一定规模的军事演习；防止发生军用飞行器飞越实际控制线的侵犯事件；防止实际控制线地区危险军事活动；加强实际控制线附近地区双方军事人员和机构的交往与合作等。

　　In November 1996, China and India signed the Agreement on Confidence-Building Measures in the Military Field Along the Line of Actual Control in the China-India Border Areas. The agreement provides that each side should not engage in military activities that threaten the other side or undermines peace, tranquility and stability in the border areas; that they should strictly respect and observe the line of actual control in the border areas and neither side should overstep the line of actual control in their activities pending ultimate resolution of the boundary question; that they should reduce or limit the size of field army, border defense forces, para-military forces and any other mutually agreed category of armed forces and armaments deployed in the mutually agreed geographical zones along the line of actual control to the mutually agreed ceilings; that each side shall refrain from staging military exercises directing against the other in the close proximity of the line of actual control in the border areas and restrict the scale of military exercises and provide prior notification to the other with regard to military exercises of certain scale in the close proximity of the line of actual control in the border areas; that they should prevent air intrusions by military aircraft across the line of actual control and dangerous military activities in the areas along the line of actual control; that both sides should strengthen exchanges and cooperation between their military personnel and establishments in the border areas along the line of actual control.

　　此外，1994年，中国与俄罗斯签署《关于预防危险军事活动的协定》，《中华人民共和国主席和俄罗斯联邦总统关于互不首先使用核武器和互不将战略核武器瞄准对方的联合声明》。1998年1月，中国与美国签署《关于建立加强海上军事安全磋商机制的协定》。同年6月，中国国家主席江泽民与美国总统克林顿宣布，双方决定，不把各自控制下的战略核武器瞄准对方。中国还与俄罗斯、美国建立了国家元首间直通保密电话联系。

　　In addition, in 1994, China and Russia signed the Agreement on Prevention of Dangerous Military Activities and the Joint Statement by the President of the People's Republic of China and the President of the Russian Federation on Non-First-Use of Nuclear Weapons and Detargeting of Strategic Nuclear Weapons Against Each Other. In January 1998, China and the United States signed the Agreement Between the Ministry of National Defense of the PRC and the Department of Defense of the USA on Establishing a Consultation Mechanism to Strengthen Military Maritime Safety. In June of the same year, President Jiang Zemin of China and President Clinton of the United States announced that the two sides had decided not to target each other with the strategic nuclear weapons under their respective control. In addition, confidential direct redline telephone communication links have been established between the head of state of China and the heads of state of Russia and the United States.

　　地区安全合作

　　Regional Security Cooperation

　　中国支持在平等参与、协商一致、求同存异、循序渐进基础上，开展多层次、多渠道、多形式的地区安全对话与合作。中国参加了东盟地区论坛（ARF）、亚洲相互协作与建立信任措施会议（CICA）、亚太安全合作理事会（CSCAP）和东北亚合作对话会（NEACD）等活动，主张通过这些政府和民间讨论安全问题的重要渠道，增进各国相互了解与信任，促进地区和平与稳定。

　　China advocates regional-security dialogue and cooperation at different levels, through various channels and in different forms. Such dialogue and cooperation should follow these principles: participation on an equal footing, reaching unanimity through consultation, seeking common ground while reserving differences, and proceeding in an orderly way and step by step. China has participated in the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA), Council on Security Cooperation in Asia and Pacific Region (CSCAP), Northeast Asia Cooperation Dialogue (NEACD) and other activities, holding that all countries should further mutual understanding and trust by discussions on security issues through these important governmental and non-governmental channels, so as to promote regional peace and stability.

　　中国参加了历届东盟地区论坛外长会议和高官会，中国外交与国防代表参加了论坛框架内的建立信任措施、维和、海上搜救、抢险救灾、预防性外交、不扩散、指导原则等各类官方和非官方会议。中国还于1996年在北京与菲律宾联合承办了建立信任措施会议，其间邀请各国代表参观了中国军事单位和军事表演，会议取得了圆满成功。中国支持东盟地区论坛在建立信任措施领域创造性的探索，并提出了一系列建设性的建议和主张，如倡导军事医学、军事法学和军转民多边合作，鼓励高层军事互访、军舰互访和人员交流，支持抢险救灾合作以及海上航行安全、海洋环保合作等。中国还每年向论坛提交国防政策声明和其他相关文件。

　　China has attended all the ARF foreign minister meetings and ARF senior official meetings. Chinese representatives of foreign and defense affairs have attended official and unofficial meetings within the framework of the forum, their topics of discussion including promotion of confidence-building measures, peace keeping, maritime search and rescue, the handling of emergencies and disaster relief, preventative diplomacy, non-proliferation, and guiding principles. In 1996 China and the Philippines jointly sponsored the Conference on Confidence-Building Measures in Beijing. Between sessions of the conference, which was crowned with success, foreign representatives were invited to visit Chinese military units and observe military exercises. China supports the ARF's creative explorations for the promotion of confidence-building measures and has made a series of constructive suggestions and opinions in this regard. For example, China advocates development of military medicine, science of military law and multilateral cooperation on conversion of military technologies and facilities for civilian use. It encourages the exchange of high-level visits by senior military officers, and port calls by naval vessels, as well as exchanges of military personnel between different countries, and supports cooperation in emergency rescue and disaster relief, maritime navigation safety, and marine environmental protection. In addition, every year China submits to the forum a statement on national defense policy and other related documents.

　　中国一直积极参与哈萨克斯坦倡导的亚洲相互协作与建立信任措施会议进程，认为会议宗旨与中国的亚洲安全目标基本一致，主张会议在充分考虑亚洲地区特殊性和多样性的基础上稳步发展。中国于1996年正式加入亚太安全合作理事会，并于1997年成立亚太安全合作理事会中国委员会，中国委员会一直认真参与理事会的活动。自1993年东北亚合作对话会成立以来，中国参加了历次会议，并于1996年在北京主办了第四次大会，中国还与其他成员一道，推动对话会就东北亚国家合作指导原则达成一致。

　　China has always been an active participant in the process of the CICA initiated by Kazakhstan, regarding the purpose of the conference as basically suiting China's security goal in Asia. It suggests that the conference develop steadily with full consideration of Asia's regional peculiarities and diversities. In 1996 China formally joined the CSCAP, and in 1997 established the CSCAP China Committee, which has always conscientiously participated in the council's activities. Since 1993, when the NEACD was founded, China has attended all NEACD meetings and, in 1996, hosted its fourth conference in Beijing. Along with other member states, China has also helped the NEACD to achieve unanimity on the guiding principle of cooperation between Northeast Asian countries.

　　中国与美国、俄罗斯、日本、法国、加拿大、澳大利亚等国，就共同关心的问题开展了不同形式的安全或防务磋商。中国国防部和其他有关部门的官员及学者，日益广泛和深入地参与关于亚太安全的各类研讨和相关活动，增进了中国与有关国家间的了解与信任，体现了中国维护亚太持久和平的积极意愿和努力。

　　China has held consultations in different forms with the United States, Russia, Japan, France, Canada and Australia on issues of common interest in the areas of security and defense. Officials and scholars of China's Ministry of National Defense and other related departments have participated, in increasing breadth and depth, in various discussions and other activities on Asian-Pacific security, which has promoted understanding and trust between China and the countries concerned, and shown China's positive intentions and efforts to maintain lasting peace in the Asia-Pacific region.

　　参与联合国维持和平行动

　　Participating in the UN Peace-Keeping Operations

　　中国作为联合国安理会常任理事国，一贯致力于维护国际和平与安全，重视并支持联合国在联合国宪章精神指导下，为维护国际和平与安全发挥其应有的作用。为使联合国维和行动取得成功并健康发展，中国认为应该确立和遵循以下指导原则：

　　As a permanent member of the UN Security Council, China has consistently engaged in efforts to maintain international peace and security. It cherishes and supports the role of the United Nations in keeping international peace and security under the guidance of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. In order to help UN peace-keeping operations achieve success and develop in a healthy way, China holds that the following guiding principles should be stipulated and followed:

　　遵循联合国宪章的宗旨和原则，特别是尊重国家主权和不干涉内政的原则。

　　The aims and principles of the Charter of the United Nations must be adhered to, especially the principles of respecting the sovereignty of all countries and non-interference in other countries' internal affairs.

　　坚持以斡旋、调解、谈判等和平手段解决争端，不应该动辄采取强制性行动。即使是人道主义行动，也不应诉诸军事手段。

　　Disputes must be settled using peaceful means, such as mediation, good office and negotiation. Compulsory means should not be adopted indiscreetly, nor should military means be resorted to even for humanitarian ends.

　　反对实行双重标准，不能把个别或少数国家的政策主张强加给联合国安理会。不能允许少数国家假联合国之名，行军事干涉之实。

　　Double standards should be opposed. The policies and views of any one country or a few countries should not be imposed on the UN Security Council, and military interference by a small number of countries under the guise of the UN should not be allowed.

　　采取维和行动，要遵循事先征得当事国的同意、严守中立、除自卫外不得使用武力等被历史证明是行之有效的一系列原则。

　　In peace-keeping operations, the following principles, which have proved to be effective in the past, should be adhered to: obtaining agreement from the country concerned beforehand, strictly observing neutrality and prohibiting the use of force except for self-defense.

　　坚持实事求是，量力而行。条件不成熟时不应实施维和行动，更不应该使之成为冲突一方，偏离维和的根本方向。

　　Be practical and realistic. A peace-keeping operation should not be undertaken when conditions are not yet ripe, nor should a peace-keeping force become a party to a conflict, which would be a deviation from the fundamental purpose of peace-keeping operations.

　　中国本着上述精神参与了联合国维持和平行动方面的活动。自1990年首次向联合国维和行动派遣军事观察员以来，中国已先后向“联合国中东停战监督组织”（UNTSO）、“联合国伊拉克—科威特观察团”（UNIKOM）、“联合国柬埔寨临时权力机构”（UNTAC）、“联合国西撒哈拉公民投票特派团”（MINURSO）、“联合国莫桑比克行动”（ONUMOZ）和“联合国利比里亚观察团”（UNOMIL）等6项联合国维和行动，派出军事观察员32批437人次。

　　Adhering to the above principles, China has participated in UN peace-keeping operations. In 1990, China began to assign military observers to UN peace-keeping operations; since then it has sent 437 military observers in 32 groups to join six UN peace-keeping operations, viz, the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) in the Middle East, United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM), Un ited Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ) and United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL).

　　1992年，中国政府派遣工程兵部队参加联合国驻柬埔寨临时权力机构的维持和平行动。中国政府分两批共派遣800名赴柬维和官兵，在18个月内完成了机场、公路、桥梁等多项工程建设和维修任务，其中修复和扩建机场4个，修复公路4条共640公里，新架设或修复桥梁47座，并完成了其他大量的勤务工程，为保障联柬维和部队行动的顺利实施作出了贡献。

　　In 1992, the Chinese government dispatched an engineer unit to support the UNTAC peace-keeping operations. A total of 800 men were sent in two batches, who, in 18 months, repaired or extended four airports, repaired four highways totaling 640 kilometers, built or rebuilt 47 bridges and completed many other service projects, making useful contributions to the successful operations of the United Nations peace-keeping forces in Cambodia.

　　目前中国仍有32名军事观察员分别在“联合国中东停战监督组织”、“联合国伊拉克—科威特观察团”、“联合国西撒哈拉公民投票特派团”3个维和任务区执行任务。1997年5月，中国政府决定原则上参加联合国维和待命安排，并将在适当时候向联合国维和行动提供军事观察员、民事警察和工程、医疗、运输等后勤保障分队。

　　China still has 32 military observers serving with the UNTSO, UNIKOM and MINURSO. In May 1997, the Chinese government decided that in principle China would take part in the UN's stand-by arrangements and would provide military observers, civilian policemen, and engineering, medical, transportation and other logistic service teams in due time for UN peace-keeping operations.

　　中国派出参加联合国维和行动的人员认真履行了所承担的职责，有的还献出了宝贵的生命，为维护世界和平作出了贡献。今后，中国仍将以积极务实的态度继续参加联合国维和领域的活动。

　　Chinese personnel assisting UN peace-keeping operations have conscientiously fulfilled their responsibilities and made great contributions to world peace. Some of them have even sacrificed their lives. In the years to come, China will continue to participate in UN peace-keeping operations in a positive and down-to-earth manner.

　　军控与裁军

　　Arms Control and Disarmament 

　　随着冷战结束，国际安全形势趋于缓和，国际军控与裁军取得较大进展：《关于禁止发展、生产、储存和使用化学武器及销毁此种武器的公约》（《禁止化学武器公约》）于1993年1月达成，并于1997年4月生效；《不扩散核武器条约》于1995年5月实现无限期延长；《全面禁止核试验条约》于1996年9月在纽约联合国总部开放供签署；世界无核区范围不断扩大；《禁止或限制使用某些可被认为具有过分伤害力或滥杀滥伤作用的特定常规武器公约》（《特定常规武器公约》）“激光致盲武器议定书”以及新的“地雷议定书”分别于1995年10月和1996年5月达成；1997年6月国际原子能机构通过了旨在加强保障监督有效性的议定书。
      
　　Since the end of the cold war the international security situation has tended to relax, and great advances have been made in international arms control and disarmament. The Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction (CWC) was concluded in January 1993, and came into effect in April 1997. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) was indefinitely extended in May, 1995. The Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) was opened for signature in the New York UN headquarters in September 1996. Nuclear-weapon-free zones continue to expand. The Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons and the Amended Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices attached to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects (Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons) were adopted in October 1995 and May 1996, respectively. And in June 1997, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) passed a protocol for the purpose of increasing the effectiveness of safeguards.

　　然而，裁军领域仍面临亟待解决的问题。美、俄两国仍保留着庞大的核武库，少数军事强国仍然坚持冷战思维和核威慑政策，大力发展高精尖武器，特别是先进的导弹防御系统。1998年5月，由印度，随后由巴基斯坦进行的核试验，对国际防扩散努力造成沉重打击，也对地区乃至世界和平与稳定产生了严重影响。

　　But in spite of such progress, there are still some problems crying out for solutions in the sphere of disarmament. The United States and Russia still keep their large nuclear arsenals. In addition, a few military powers continue to stick to their cold war mentality and nuclear deterrence policy, strenuously developing highly advanced and sophisticated weapons, especially advanced missile defense systems. The nuclear tests conducted by India, and then by Pakistan, in May 1998 have not only seriously impeded international non-proliferation efforts, but have produced a grave impact on regional and world peace and stability.

　　中国政府高度重视军控与裁军工作，并将其作为总体外交及国防政策的重要组成部分。中国政府主张，国际社会应促进公正、合理、全面、均衡的军控与裁军;裁军的目的是增进而不是减损各国的安全；应加强国际军控条约的普遍性；继续通过具有普遍代表性的多边谈判机制谈判缔结新条约；拥有最大、最先进常规和核武库的国家应继续履行其对裁军负有的特殊责任；应防止少数国家在凭借其先进军事科技和经济实力谋求绝对安全和军事优势的同时，将裁军目标引向广大发展中国家，剥夺其正当的自卫权利和手段;应全面整顿和改造现有歧视性和排他性的出口控制制度和安排，在普遍参与的基础上，谈判制定公平合理的国际防扩散制度。

　　The Chinese government highly stresses the importance of arms control and disarmament work, and takes it as an important component of its overall diplomacy and defense policy. The Chinese government holds that the international community should promote fair, rational, comprehensive and balanced arms control and disarmament; the purpose of disarmament should be to reinforce, not weaken or undermine, the security of all countries; the universality of the international arms control treaties should be enhanced; new treaties should be concluded through a broadly representative multilateral negotiations mechanism; those countries having the largest and most sophisticated conventional and nuclear arsenals should continue to fulfil their special responsibilities for disarmament; efforts should be made to prevent a few countries directing the target of disarmament at a broad spectrum of developing countries in order to deprive them of their legitimate right and means for self-defense, at the same time taking advantage of their own advanced military technology and superior economic strength to seek absolute security and military superiority; the existing discriminatory and exclusive export control mechanisms and arrangements should be overhauled and rectified comprehensively, and a fair and rational international non-proliferation system should be set up through negotiations on the basis of universal participation.

　　中国积极参加多边军控与裁军谈判及相关国际会议。1997年4月，中国与俄罗斯、哈萨克斯坦、吉尔吉斯斯坦和塔吉克斯坦签署《关于在边境地区相互裁减军事力量的协定》，规定：将中国与四国边境地区的军事力量裁减到与睦邻友好关系相适应的最低水平，使其只具有防御性，互不使用武力或以武力相威胁，不谋求单方面军事优势；裁减和限制部署在边界线两侧各100公里区域内的陆军、空军、防空军航空兵的人员和主要种类的武器装备，并为其及边防部队的人员和武器装备规定最高限额；在上述区域内不部署海军江河作战舰艇；确定裁减方式和期限；交换边境地区军事力量的有关资料；对执行协定情况进行监督核查等。中国还与许多国家建立了双边军控磋商机制。中国签署或批准了几乎所有的多边军控条约，并忠实地履行条约义务，为推动国际军控与裁军事业的发展作出了积极贡献。

　　China has steadfastly attended multilateral negotiations on arms control and disarmament, and some related international conferences. In April 1997, China and Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan signed the Agreement on Mutual Reduction of Military Forces in the Border Areas. It stipulates that the five countries shall reduce their military forces in the border areas to the minimum level compatible with their friendly and good-neighborly relations, a level that shall not go beyond their defense needs; none of the parties shall use or threaten to use force against the other party or parties, neither shall they seek unilateral military superiority; they shall reduce and limit the size of their ground force, air force, air aviation and border guard units as well as the quantity of main categories of their armaments and military equipment deployed in the border areas as deep as 100 kilometers from their border; they shall determine the ceilings for the reduced size, modality and the time limit for the reduction of military forces; combat vessels shall not be deployed in rivers in the above-mentioned areas; they shall exchange relevant information and data on the military forces in the border areas; and they shall monitor and verify the implementation of the Agreement. China has also set up bilateral arms control consultation mechanisms with many other countries. China has signed or ratified almost all the multilateral arms control treaties, and faithfully fulfilled its obligations under those treaties, making a positive contribution to the progress of international arms control and disarmament.

　　核武器问题

　　The Issue of Nuclear Weapons

　　中国作为核武器国家，积极支持和参与防止核扩散的国际努力，推动核裁军进程，致力于在全球范围内最终实现全面禁止和彻底销毁核武器的目标。

　　As a nuclear-weapon state, China vigorously supports and participates in the international non-nuclear proliferation efforts, promotes the process of nuclear disarmament and works hard for the realization of the final goal of the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons worldwide.

　　中国一贯主张全面禁止和彻底销毁核武器。1996年，中国在第五十一届联大明确提出核裁军五点主张：第一，核大国放弃核威慑政策，拥有最大核武库的国家继续大幅度削减其核武器；第二，所有核武器国家都承担在任何时候和任何情况下不首先使用核武器的义务，都承诺无条件地不对无核武器国家和无核武器区使用或威胁使用核武器，并尽早就此缔结国际法律文件；第三，所有在国外部署核武器的国家都将这些武器全部撤回本国，所有核武器国家都承诺支持建立无核武器区的主张，尊重无核武器区的地位，并承担相应的义务；第四，各国不发展、不部署外空武器系统和破坏战略安全与稳定的导弹防御系统；第五，各国谈判缔结关于全面禁止和彻底销毁核武器的国际公约。

　　China has consistently advocated the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. At the 51st Session of the UN General Assembly in 1996 China clearly put forward a five-point proposal on nuclear disarmament: 1. The major nuclear powers should abandon the nuclear deterrence policy, and the states having the largest nuclear arsenals should continue to drastically reduce their nuclear weapons stockpiles; 2. all nuclear-weapon states should commit themselves not to be the first to use nuclear weapons at any time and in any circumstances, undertake unconditionally not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones, and conclude a legally binding international document as soon as possible; 3. all states which have deployed nuclear weapons outside their borders should withdraw all these weapons home, and all nuclear-weapon states should pledge to support the proposal on establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones, respect the status of such zones and undertake corresponding obligations; 4. no state should develop or deploy outer space weapons or missile defense systems, which harm strategic security and stability; 5. all states should negotiate and conclude an international convention on the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons.

　　中国从拥有核武器的第一天起就郑重声明，在任何时候、任何情况下都不首先使用核武器，此后又无条件承诺不对无核武器国家和无核武器区使用或威胁使用核武器。中国积极支持有关国家在自愿基础上建立无核区的努力，并已签署和批准了《拉美及加勒比禁止核武器条约》、《南太无核区条约》以及《非洲无核武器区条约》相关议定书。1995年4月，中国发表国家声明，重申无条件向无核武器国家和无核武器区提供消极安全保证的承诺，并首次承诺提供积极安全保证。

　　From the first day it possessed nuclear weapons, China has solemnly declared its determination not to be the first to use such weapons at any time and in any circumstances, and later undertook unconditionally not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones. China vigorously supports the efforts of the relevant countries to establish nuclear-free zones on a voluntary basis, and has signed and approved the relevant protocols of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco), the South Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Rarotonga) and the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba). In April 1995 China issued an official statement, reiterating its commitment to unconditionally provide non-nuclear-weapon states and nuclear-weapon-free zones with negative security assurance, and for the first time promised to provide them with positive security assurance.

　　中国于1992年3月加入《不扩散核武器条约》，忠实履行了不扩散核武器的国际义务，并为条约的无限期延长作出了贡献。中国自始至终参加了《全面禁止核试验条约》的谈判，并于1996年9月24日条约开放签署当日签署了该条约。中国支持尽早缔结一项“禁止生产核武器用裂变材料公约”（“禁产公约”）。为此，中美两国外长曾于1994年10月发表联合声明，表示愿意共同努力，推动尽早达成一项多边、非歧视性和可有效核查的“禁产公约”。1997年4月，中国与美、俄、英、法四个核武器国家发表声明，重申五国关于支持在香农报告所载授权的基础上尽早谈判缔结“禁产公约”的立场。中国支持国际原子能机构通过的旨在加强现有保障监督体系有效性的计划（“93+2计划”），并承诺在自愿交保的基础上，在适当时候与国际原子能机构谈判签署具有法律约束力的文件，采取与中国根据《不扩散核武器条约》第一条所承担义务相适应的措施。

　　In March 1992 China acceded to the NPT and has faithfully fulfilled its international obligations to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and made contributions to the indefinite extension of the treaty. China was represented at the negotiations on the CTBT from beginning to end, and signed it on September 24, 1996, the first day the treaty was opened for signature. China supports the early conclusion of the Convention on Banning the Production of Fissile Materials for Nuclear Weapons or Other Nuclear Explosive Devices (FMCT). For this purpose, the foreign ministers of China and the United States issued a joint statement in October 1994, saying that the two countries would make joint efforts to promote an early conclusion of a multilateral, non-discriminatory and effectively verifiable FMCT. In April 1997, China and four other nuclear-weapon states -- the United States, Russia, Britain and France -- issued a statement, reiterating their stand for concluding, through negotiation, a FMCT as soon as possible on the basis of the mandate contained in the Shannon Report. China supports the IAEA's Program for Strengthening the Effectiveness and Promoting the Efficiency of the Safeguard System (93 + 2 Program), and promises that, on the basis of voluntary safeguard, China will negotiate and conclude with the IAEA a legally binding document at a proper time, and will adopt measures corresponding to the obligations China undertakes in accordance with the first article of the NPT.

　　随着国际形势的缓和以及大国关系的不断改善，中国认为核武器国家之间承诺互不首先使用核武器的条件已经成熟。因此，中国于1994年1月正式向美、俄、英、法四国提出了《互不首先使用核武器条约》草案，并建议五个核国家尽早就此进行磋商。中国认为，缔结这样一个条约将有利于增进核武器国家间的相互信任，进一步减少核战争的危险。在积极推动谈判缔结多边条约的同时，中国还积极谋求与其他核国家在双边基础上相互承诺不首先使用核武器。目前，中俄已相互作出了不首先使用核武器的保证。

　　As the international situation is tending to relax and relations between the major powers continue to improve, China believes that the conditions are now ripe for nuclear-weapon states to undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons against each other. So, in January 1994, China formally presented a draft for the Treaty on the Non-First-Use of Nuclear Weapons to the United States, Russia, Britain and France, proposing that the five nuclear-weapon states hold discussions on the treaty as soon as possible. China holds that such a treaty will help to promote mutual trust among nuclear-weapon states and further reduce the danger of nuclear war. While energetically promoting negotiations for conclusion of a multilateral treaty, China also actively seeks, together with other nuclear-weapon states, to undertake, on a bilateral basis, not to be the first to use nuclear weapons against each other. So far, China and Russia have already made such a promise to each other.

　　化学武器和生物武器问题

　　The Issue of Chemical and Biological Weapons

　　中国政府一贯主张全面禁止和彻底销毁化学武器。中国于1993年1月签署了《禁止化学武器公约》，1996年12月批准该公约并于1997年4月25日交存公约批准书，从而成为公约的原始缔约国。中国支持公约的宗旨和目标，主张应尽快根据公约有关规定销毁化学武器及其生产设施;同时认为，公约应增进各国在化学领域的经贸与科技交流，使化工技术真正造福于人类。

　　The Chinese government has always stood for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of chemical weapons. China signed the CWC in January 1993, ratified the convention in December 1996 and deposited the instruments of ratification on April 25, 1997, thus becoming an original signatory state to the CWC. China supports the purpose and goals of the CWC, and advocates that chemical weapons and facilities for their production should be destroyed as soon as possible, in accordance with the related provisions in the CWC. Meanwhile, China holds that the convention should promote international economic, trade, and scientific and technological exchanges in the field of chemical industry, ensuring that chemical industry technology truly benefits mankind.

　　中国积极认真履行了《禁止化学武器公约》规定的各项义务，按时并完整地递交了初始宣布和年度宣布，接受了公约组织的多次核查，并参加了公约组织的各次执行理事会和两次缔约国大会。

　　China has been active and conscientious in fulfilling the obligations stipulated in the CWC. It delivered the initial declaration and annual declaration in time and in their entirety and has accepted inspections by the convention. It has also participated in every one of the convention's executive council meetings and the two conferences of states parties.

　　中国在历史上曾是化学武器的受害者，在领土上至今还遗留着侵华日军遗弃的大量化学武器，这些化学武器仍在危害当地人民的生命安全和生存环境。为此，中国要求在别国遗弃化学武器的国家按公约规定尽快干净彻底地销毁遗弃化武。

　　China has been a victim of chemical weapons. Large quantities of chemical weapons abandoned by Japanese aggressor troops are found in China to this day, which still threaten the lives and property of the local people and the environment in which they live. In view of this, China demands that, in keeping with the stipulations of the convention, any country that has left chemical weapons in another country destroy, as soon as possible, such weapons wholly and thoroughly.

　　中国主张全面禁止和彻底销毁生物武器，既反对任何国家发展、生产、研制和储存生物武器，也反对任何国家以任何方式扩散此种武器及其技术。中国于1984年11月参加了《禁止发展、生产和储存细菌（生物）及毒素武器和销毁此种武器的公约》（《禁止生物武器公约》）。作为公约缔约国，中国认真、全面地履行了自己所承担的义务。1987年以来，中国一直按公约审议会的决定，逐年向联合国报告与《禁止生物武器公约》有关的建立信任措施方面的资料和情况。

　　China advocates the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of biological weapons. It opposes the production, development and stockpiling of biological weapons by any country, and the proliferation of such weapons and related technology in any form by any country. In November 1984 China acceded to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction (BWC). As a state party to the BWC, China has fully and conscientiously fulfilled its obligations under the convention. Since 1987 China has, year after year, reported to the United Nations on convention-related information and data concerning confidence-building measures, in accordance with the decisions of the Review Conferences of the BWC.

  中国在历史上也曾深受生物武器之害。中国支持全面加强《禁止生物武器公约》有效性的工作，积极参加了于1994年设立的公约缔约国特设工作组有关制定《公约》议定书的工作，并为议定书的谈判取得进展作出了贡献。中国认为，鉴于核查机制所涉问题的复杂性，各国应以实事求是的态度，探寻有效、可行的核查措施，并制定具体措施防止滥用核查，保护缔约国正当的商业和安全机密。中国认为，在加强公约核查机制的同时，还应加强缔约国为和平目的进行的生物技术国际合作与交流。

　　Having suffered grievously from biological weapons attacks in the past, China supports work that helps comprehensively to strengthen the effectiveness of the convention. It has actively participated in the work of drawing up a Protocol of the Ad Hoc Group of States Parties to the BWC established in 1994, and has made contributions to the progress of the negotiations on the Protocol. China holds, in view of the complexity of the problems relating to the verification mechanism, that every country should, in a down-to-earth way, seek effective and feasible verification measures, and formulate concrete steps to prevent abuse of verification, and to protect the rightful commercial and security secrets of states parties. China considers that, while improving the convention's verification mechanism, international cooperation and exchanges among states parties in the sphere of bio-technology for peaceful purposes should also be strengthened.

　　外空非武器化问题

　　The Issue of Keeping Outer Space Weapon-Free

　　外层空间属于全人类，应完全用于和平目的，造福于人类。为此，中国主张全面禁止和彻底销毁外空武器。反对发展反卫星武器。中国主张，国际社会，特别是拥有空间能力的大国，应采取切实行动防止外空武器化：全面禁止一切类型的外空武器，包括反导弹和反卫星武器，实现外空非武器化；禁止在外空、从外空或向外空使用武力或进行敌对行动；所有国家都承诺不试验、生产或部署外空武器，也不利用外空谋求地面上的战略优势，如利用在外空部署地面反导系统的重要组成部分来研制、发展战略防御武器；尽早谈判缔结包括上述内容的具有法律约束力的国际协定。 

　　Outer space belongs to all mankind, and should be used exclusively for peaceful purposes to benefit mankind. To this end, China stands for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of weapons deployed in outer space. It opposes the development of anti-satellite weapons. China maintains that the international community, the big powers with the capacity to utilize outer space in particular, should take the following realistic steps to prevent a weaponized outer space: A complete ban on weapons of any kind in outer space, including anti-missile and anti-satellite weapons, so as to keep outer space free of weapons; a ban on the use of force or conduct of hostilities in, from or to outer space; and all countries should undertake neither to experiment with, produce or deploy outer space weapons nor to utilize outer space to seek strategic advantages on the ground, for example, using disposition of the important parts of ground anti-missile systems in outer space for the purpose of developing strategic defensive weapons. In addition, negotiations should be held as soon as possible for the conclusion of a legally-binding international agreement with the above-mentioned contents.

　　自80年代初起，中国就作为联大有关外空非武器化决议的联合提案国，推动在日内瓦裁军谈判会议等多边机制中就此展开谈判。在裁军谈判会议外空特委会成立之初，中国即向其递交了《中国关于防止外空军备竞赛的立场文件》（CD/579）。中国的立场得到了许多国家的支持。

　　Since the beginning of the 1980s, as one of the co-sponsors of the UN General Assembly resolutions on keeping outer space weapon-free, China has promoted negotiations on this problem at the Geneva Conference on Disarmament and through other multilateral mechanisms. As early as at the founding of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Conference on Disarmament on the Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space, China submitted to it a paper on China's Position on the Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space (CD/579). Many countries have supported China's position.

　　杀伤人员地雷问题

　　The Issue of Anti-Personnel Landmines

　　中国历来十分重视杀伤人员地雷误伤平民的问题，支持对杀伤人员地雷的使用和转让实行适当、合理的限制，分阶段地实现全面禁止杀伤人员地雷的最终目标。同时，中国政府认为，在处理杀伤人员地雷问题时，应兼顾人道主义关切和主权国家正当防卫需要两个方面。各国根据联合国宪章的宗旨和原则，以合法的军事手段，包括使用杀伤人员地雷，保护本国人民的安全，这本身就是人道主义的重要组成部分。

　　China has all along attached great importance to the problem of threat to innocent people caused by the indiscriminate use of anti-personnel landmines (APLs). It is in favor of imposing proper and rational restrictions on the use and transfer of APLs in a bid to achieve the ultimate objective of comprehensive prohibition of such landmines through a phased approach. In the meantime, the Chinese government maintains that, in addressing the problem of APLs, consideration should be given to both humanitarian concern and the legitimate defense requirements of sovereign states. To safeguard the safety of their people by sovereign states through legitimate military means, including the use of APLs in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations itself is part and parcel of humanitarianism.

　　中国是一个有着漫长陆地边界的国家，在找到杀伤人员地雷替代办法并形成安全防御能力以前，中国不得不保留在本国领土上使用杀伤人员地雷的权利。中国在合法条件下使用杀伤人员地雷，完全是为了防止外来军事干涉和侵略，维护国家统一与领土完整，保障人民安居乐业。这是中国正当安全防卫的需要，也符合联合国宪章关于自卫权利的规定。

　　As a country with long land borders, China has to reserve the right to use APLs on its territory pending an alternative solution is found and its requirements in security and defense capability are catered for. China's use of APLs under legitimate circumstances is entirely aimed at preventing foreign military interference and aggression so as to maintain national unity and territorial integrity and safeguard its people's well-being. This not only represents China's legitimate national security and defense requirements, but also accords with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations on the right to self-defense.

　　中国军队一向严格控制杀伤人员地雷的使用，禁止滥布滥用，同时还对杀伤人员地雷替代办法进行研究。中国积极参加了《特定常规武器公约》“地雷议定书”的修订工作和联合国裁军谈判会议处理杀伤人员地雷问题的讨论。

　　The PLA has always exercised strict control over the use of APLs and prohibited the indiscriminate use and laying of such landmines while actively studying the possible alternatives to APLs. China has also actively participated in the revision of the Landmine Protocol (Protocol II) to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW) and the discussions on the question of APLs at the UN Conference on Disarmament.

　　中国政府对地雷出口历来采取十分慎重和负责的态度。1994年12月，中国参加了联合国大会关于暂停出口杀伤人员地雷决议的协商。1996年4月，中国政府郑重宣布暂停出口不符合《特定常规武器公约》新修订的“地雷议定书”所规定的杀伤人员地雷。

　　The Chinese government has all along adopted a very prudent and responsible attitude toward landmine export. In December 1994, China joined in the UN General Assembly's consultation on its resolution concerning the moratorium on the export of APLs. In April 1996, the Chinese government solemnly declared its suspension of export of APLs that are not compatible with those APLs provided for in the Amended Landmine Protocol to the CCW.

　　中国政府认为，扫除已部署的杀伤人员地雷是解决杀伤人员地雷威胁平民安全问题的一个重要组成部分。为此，中国政府在战后扫雷问题上一贯持认真负责的态度，并做了大量富有成效的工作。1992年初至1994年底，中国军队在云南省和广西壮族自治区边境地区，组织实施了第一次大规模扫雷行动，共排除各种地雷和爆炸物100多万枚，销毁废旧弹药及爆炸物品近200吨，完成扫雷面积108平方公里，打通边贸通道、口岸170多个;恢复弃耕地、弃荒牧场和山林3万多公顷。1997年底，中国政府再次决定，从1997年11月至1999年12月，在上述地区实施第二次大规模扫雷行动。

　　The Chinese government is of the view that the clearance of APLs is part and parcel of the overall efforts in eliminating the threat to innocent civilians resulting from the indiscriminate use of such landmines. It has consistently adopted a responsible attitude toward post-war demining question and has done considerable fruitful work in this regard. From the beginning of 1992 to the end of 1994, the PLA conducted its first large-scale demining operation in the border areas of Yunnan Province and the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, cleared a total of over one million landmines and explosive devices and destroyed nearly 200 tons of disused or de-activated ammunitions and explosive devices, covering an area of 108 square kilometers with over 170 border trade passes and ports re-opened, and over 30,000 hectares of farmland, pasture and mountain forests restored. At the end of 1997, the Chinese government decided to conduct its second large-scale demining operation in the above areas starting from November 1997 up to December 1999.

　　中国政府一直尽力援助受杀伤人员地雷危害的国家，向柬埔寨等一些遭受雷害的国家提供探雷器材，帮助培训扫雷人员，为有关国家顺利进行战后重建作出了贡献。1997年11月，中国国家主席江泽民宣布，中国将继续积极支持国际扫雷努力和国际扫雷合作，包括向国际扫雷基金提供捐赠，在扫雷培训、技术和设备方面提供援助。1997年12月2日至4日，中国政府派观察员出席了在渥太华举行的《关于禁止使用、储存、生产和转让杀伤人员地雷及销毁此种地雷的公约》签约大会，并参加了同时举行的关于国际扫雷问题的圆桌会议。

　　The Chinese government has always done its utmost to assist APL-affected countries. It furnished Cambodia and some other mine-affected countries with mine-detection/clearance equipment, and also helped train demining personnel for these countries, thus contributing to their smooth post-war rehabilitation. In November 1997, the Chinese President Jiang Zemin declared that China would continue to actively support international demining efforts and cooperation, including donation and provision of assistance in the fields of demining training, technology and equipment through the relevant international demining funds. The Chinese government also sent observers to participate in the Signing Ceremony of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction and the international demining roundtable (Mine Action Forum) held from 2 to 4 December 1997 in Ottawa.

　　敏感物资和军事装备出口控制

　　Control of the Export of Sensitive Materials and Military Equipment

　　中国政府赞成采取必要措施对敏感物资和技术的转让实行有效国际监督，防止大规模杀伤性武器及其运载工具的扩散。但同时认为，国际防扩散努力应遵循公平、合理的原则，反对实行双重标准，不能以防扩散为名损害其他国家的主权，不能影响正常的国际经贸、科技合作与交流。

　　The Chinese government agrees that necessary measures should be adopted to apply effective international control to the transfer of sensitive materials and technologies in order to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their carriers. However, at the same time, China holds that international efforts to prevent such proliferation should follow the principle of fairness and rationality, and opposes a double standard whereby anti-proliferation is used as a pretext to infringe upon the sovereignty of other countries and harm normal international cooperation and exchanges in the fields of economy, trade and science and technology.

　　中国高度重视敏感物资的出口管制问题，参照国际惯例，对敏感物资的转让实施了一系列管理措施。

　　China attaches great importance to control over the export of sensitive materials, and has implemented a series of administration measures regarding the transfer of sensitive materials on the basis of international practice.

　　在核出口方面，作为《不扩散核武器条约》缔约国，中国奉行不主张、不鼓励、不从事核武器扩散和不帮助别国发展核武器的政策，制定了核出口三原则，即：仅用于和平目的；接受国际原子能机构的保障监督；未经中方同意不得转让第三方。

　　Regarding nuclear exports, China, a signatory to the NPT, has pursued a policy of not supporting, encouraging or engaging in the proliferation of nuclear weapons and not assisting any other country to develop such weapons. It has laid down three principles regarding nuclear exports: They should serve peaceful purposes only; they should accept the safeguards of the IAEA; and they should not be retransferred to a third country without China's consent.

　　1991年11月，中国政府宣布，在连续的基础上向国际原子能机构通报中国向无核国家出口或从无核国家进口大于1有效公斤核材料的情况。1993年7月，中国正式承诺，在自愿的基础上向国际原子能机构通报所有核材料、核设备及相关非核材料的进出口情况。1996年5月，中国作出了不向未接受国际原子能机构保障监督的核设施提供帮助的承诺，包括不对其进行核出口，不与其进行人员与技术的交流与合作。1997年5月，中国政府颁布了《关于严格执行中国核出口政策有关问题的通知》，明确规定，中国出口的核材料、核设备及其相关技术，均不得提供给或用于未接受国际原子能机构保障监督的核设施。通知还对与核有关的双用途物项的出口作出了严格规定。1997年5月，中国派观察员出席了作为国际核出口控制机制之一的“桑戈委员会”会议，并于同年10月正式加入了该委员会。1997年9月，中国政府颁布了《中华人民共和国核出口管制条例》，规定，不得向未接受保障监督的核设施提供任何帮助；核出口由国务院指定的单位专营，任何其他单位或个人均不得经营;国家对核出口实行许可证制度。同时，参考国际上普遍接受的核出口控制清单制定了中国的《核出口管制清单》。中国已于1998年6月10日颁布了《核两用品及相关技术出口管制条例》，对与核有关的两用品及相关技术的出口实行严格控制。

　　In November 1991 the Chinese government declared that it would report on a continuing basis to the IAEA any export to or import from non-nuclear-weapon states of nuclear materials of one effective kilogram or above. In July 1993 China officially promised that it would voluntarily report to the IAEA any imports or exports of nuclear materials, nuclear equipment and related non-nuclear materials. In May 1996 China promised that it would not offer help to nuclear facilities which had not accepted the IAEA's safeguards, including bans on exports of nuclear materials and personnel or technology exchanges and cooperation. In May 1997, the Chinese government published the Circular on Questions Pertaining to the Strict Implementation of China's Nuclear Exports Policy, which explicitly stipulates that no nuclear materials, facilities or related technologies exported by China may be supplied to or used by nuclear facilities which have not accepted the IAEA's safeguards. The circular also has strict provisions regarding exports of dual-use nuclear-related materials. In May 1997, China sent observers to attend a meeting of the Zangger Committee, one of the mechanisms of international nuclear export control, and formally joined the committee in October of that year. In September 1997, the Chinese government issued the Regulations of the People's Republic of China on Nuclear Export Control, banning any kind of assistance to nuclear facilities which have not accepted the IAEA's safeguards. In addition, nuclear exports are monopolized by the units designated by the State Council and can not be operated by any other units or individuals. The state practices a licensing system for nuclear exports, and has drawn up the Detailed List of Nuclear Export Control in light of the commonly accepted listings of this kind in the international sphere. On June 10, 1998, China promulgated the Regulations on the Control of the Export of Dual-Use Nuclear Materials and Related Technology, imposing strict control on the export of nuclear-related dual-use materials and related technology.

　　在化学品出口管理方面，中国政府一直持慎重、负责的态度。中国不出口以制造化学武器为目的的化学品及技术和设备，支持根据《禁止化学武器公约》而进行的正常国际化工合作和科学技术资料交换，反对任何与《公约》宗旨相冲突的出口管制机制。

　　China has always been cautious and responsible regarding the exports administration of chemicals. It does not export chemicals that can be used to manufacture chemical weapons, nor does it export related technologies and equipment. It supports normal international cooperation in chemical industry and exchanges of related scientific and technological materials in accordance with the CWC, and opposes any export control mechanism conflicting with the purpose of the convention.

　　1990年9月，中国政府制定了关于严格控制化学品及其生产技术和设备的出口管理措施。1995年12月，中国政府颁布了《中华人民共和国监控化学品管理条例》，并根据该条例于1996年6月发布了《各类监控化学品名录》和《条例实施细则》，规定有关化学品进出口由国务院化学工业主管部门统一归口管理，指定专门的公司经营。

　　In September 1990, the Chinese government drafted measures for strict control of the export of chemicals and their production technologies and equipment. In December 1995, it issued the Regulations of the People's Republic of China on the Supervision and Control of Chemicals, and, in accordance with these regulations, issued the List of Chemicals Subject to Supervision and Control and the Bylaws for the Implementation of the Regulations in June 1996, stipulating that import and export of related chemicals are under the centralized management of the competent departments of the chemical industry under the State Council and operated by special companies designated by such departments.

　　在军事装备及其技术转让问题上，中国尊重各国根据联合国宪章的原则所享有的单独或集体自卫权利以及为此目的获取武器的权利，同时也关切武器装备的过度积累对世界安全和地区稳定所产生的不利影响。

　　With regard to the transfer of military equipment and related technology, China respects the right of every country to independent or collective self-defense and to acquisition of weapons for this purpose in accordance with the principles contained in the Charter of the United Nations, but at the same time it is concerned about the adverse effects on world security and regional stability arising from excessive accumulations of weaponry.

　　中国在较长时间里没有武器装备的出口贸易，直到80年代初才开始出口，且数量十分有限。自80年代中期以来，中国的军品出口一直呈递减趋势，合同成交额1987年为20多亿美元，而1991年仅6亿美元，此后几年也没有超过10亿美元。从1993年至1997年联合国公布的各国常规武器进出口登记情况来看，中国的常规武器出口与一些国家相比数量很小。

　　For many years until the early 1980s, China did not engage in weapons exports, and since then the volume of such exports has been limited. Beginning in the mid-1980s, China's export of military products has been on the decrease: The volume of contracted business was just over two billion US dollars-worth in 1987, dropped to US$ 600 million-worth in 1991, and did not exceed one billion US dollars-worth in the following years. The 1993-97 records of the UN register of conventional arms exports and imports of various countries show that China's exports of conventional weapons are small compared to those of some other countries.

　　中国对常规军事装备及其技术转让实行严格管制，并遵循以下原则：武器出口必须有助于接受国的正当防卫能力；不损害有关地区和世界的和平、安全与稳定；不利用军贸干涉接受国的内政。从1992年起中国参加了历次联合国常规武器转让登记（图表5、图表6）。

China practices strict control of the transfer of conventional military equipment and related technologies, and observes the following principles: The export of weapons must help the recipient nation enhance its capability for legitimate self-defense; it must not impair peace, security and stability of the relevant region and the world as a whole; and it must not be used to interfere in the recipient state's internal affairs. Since 1992 China has participated in the United Nations' register of conventional arms transfers (Tables 5 and 6).

    1997年10月，中国政府颁布了《中华人民共和国军品出口管理条例》，规定中国的武器出口实行许可证制度，境内一切军品转让均由政府授权的部门和经政府批准注册的公司对外经营，这些部门和公司须严格按照政府批准的项目从事经营活动。军品转让合同，需经政府有关主管部门批准后才能生效，重大武器的出口报国务院、中央军委批准。

    In October 1997, the Chinese government published the Regulations of the People's Republic of China on the Control of Military Products Export, stipulating that a licensing system shall be practiced for China's weapons exports, and all external transfers of domestic military products shall be carried out by the departments authorized by the government and companies approved and registered by the government. The Regulations state that the business activities of such departments and companies must remain strictly within the projects approved by the government, that contracts of military products transfers must require approval from the relevant competent government departments before taking effect, and that important items of arms exports must be submitted to the State Council and the Central Military Commission for approval.

    中国对导弹转让历来持十分慎重和负责的态度。中国不是《导弹及其技术控制制度》（MTCR）的成员国，没有参加这一制度的制定和修改，但基于在防扩散方面的一贯立场和有关武器出口的原则，中国政府于1992年2月承诺遵守《导弹及其技术控制制度》当时的准则和参数。1994年10月，中方重申这一承诺，承担了不出口内在性能至少达到300公里射程和500公斤有效载荷的地对地导弹的义务。中国根据上述政策，对导弹及相关物项的出口实行严格、有效的控制，从未做过违反承诺的事情。

    China has been consistently cautious and responsible regarding the transfer of missiles. China is not a member state of the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) and has not joined its formulation and revision, but, in accordance with China's consistent position on non-proliferation and its principles concerning arms exports, the Chinese government promised to observe the then guidelines and parameters of the MTCR in February 1992. In October 1994, China reaffirmed its promise and undertook the obligation of not exporting ground-to-ground missiles inherently capable of reaching a range of at least 300 kilometers with a payload of at least 500 kilograms. In line with the above policy, China has exercised strict and effective control over the export of missiles and related materials and has never done anything in violation of its commitments.

    中国在防扩散及军事装备转让方面所坚持的原则和做法，有助于推动国际军控与裁军沿着健康的方向发展，也有利于维护世界和平和地区稳定。

    The principles and measures to prevent the proliferation of weaponry and unwarranted transfers of military equipment that China has consistently upheld have helped to promote the development of international arms control and disarmament in a wholesome way, and to maintain world peace and regional stability.
西藏自治区人权事业的新进展
New Progress in Human Rights in the Tibet Autonomous Region 

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China

一九九八年二月·北京
February 1998, Beijing 

目 录
Contents

前言
Foreword

民族区域自治制度与人民的政治权利
Ethnic Regional Autonomy System and the People's Political Rights

经济发展与人民的生存权和发展权
Economic Development and the People's Rights to Existence and Development

人民享有的受教育权利、文化权利和健康保障权利
The People Enjoy the Rights to Education, Culture and Health Protection

宗教信仰自由的权利
The Right to Freedom of Religious Belief
 
结束语
Concluding Remarks


前言
Foreword

　　西藏是中华人民共和国的一个藏族自治区。十三世纪中叶，西藏正式归入中国元朝版图后，西藏一直处于中国中央政权的管辖之下，是中国领土不可分割的一部分。作为中国多民族大家庭中的一员，勤劳、纯朴的藏民族在历史上为灿烂的中华文明的发展，为祖国大家庭的团结和统一，作出了重要贡献。

　　Tibet is a Tibetan autonomous region of the People's Republic of China. Since it was officially incorporated into the domain of China's Yuan Dynasty in the mid-13th century, Tibet has been under the jurisdiction of China's Central Government as an inalienable part of Chinese territory. Throughout history the diligent and honest Tibetan people -- a member of the big multi-ethnic family of China -- has made important contributions to the development of the splendid Chinese civilization as well as to the unity and unification of the motherland. 

　　但是，1959年前，西藏长期处于政教合一、僧侣和贵族专政的封建农奴制社会。占西藏总人口95%以上的农奴和奴隶没有人身自由，人的基本权利被剥夺。1959年，西藏实行民主改革，结束了政教合一封建农奴制度的历史，占人口95%以上的百万农奴和奴隶获得了做人的权利。西藏由此进入了社会发展和人权进步的新时代。

　　For long periods before 1959, however, Tibet had been a society of feudal serfdom characterized by the merging of politics and religion and the dictatorship of the clergy and nobility. The serfs and slaves, who accounted for over 95 percent of the total population in Tibet, had no personal freedom and were deprived of their basic human rights. The Democratic Reform carried out in Tibet in 1959 ended the history of a feudal serf system which merged religion with politics, and gave the more than one million serfs and slaves in Tibet, accounting for more than 95 percent of the total population, the right to be their own masters. Following the Democratic Reform, Tibet entered a new era of social development and progress in human rights. 

　　1992年9月，中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室发表《西藏的主权归属与人权状况》白皮书，以大量事实，全面介绍和阐述了西藏地方与祖国大家庭关系的历史，以及现代西藏人权发展与进步的情况。

　　In September 1992 the Information Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China issued a white paper titled Tibet -- Its Ownership and Human Rights Situation. Drawing on a rich store of facts, the white paper introduced and expounded on the historical relations between Tibet and the big family of the motherland in a comprehensive way, as well as the progress in human rights in modern Tibet. 

　　近几年来，在中央政府的重视和支持下，在全国其它地区的大力支援下，经过西藏各族人民的努力，西藏的经济和社会发展明显加快，从而进一步推动了人权事业的发展。西藏自治区人权事业的发展，是中国人权事业新进展的一个重要组成部分。

　　In recent years, thanks to the care and support of the Central Government, the unstinted assistance from other parts of China and the efforts of the people of all ethnic groups in Tibet, the Region's economic and social development has been remarkably speeded up, thus further promoting the development of the cause of human rights there. The development of the cause of human rights in the Tibet Autonomous Region is an important component of the new progress being made in human rights in China as a whole. 

　　了解和判断西藏地区的人权状况，要看事实。这里介绍的是西藏自治区1992年以来的人权事业新进展的事实。

　　To understand and judge the human rights situation in Tibet, it is necessary to ascertain the relevant facts. Accordingly, we hereby present the facts about the new progress made in human rights in the Tibet Autonomous Region since 1992.

　　民族区域自治制度与人民的政治权利

　　Ethnic Regional Autonomy System and the People's Political Rights 

　　西藏是藏民族聚居区，藏族占全自治区总人口244万的95%，汉族和其他民族人口占5%。根据中国宪法，国家在西藏实行民族区域自治制度，建立西藏自治区，依法保障西藏各族人民平等参与管理国家和地方事务的政治权利，特别是藏族人民自主管理本地区和本民族事务的自治权利。在少数民族聚居地方实行民族区域自治，是中国的一项重要政治制度，是中国政府解决民族问题的基本政策。

　　Tibet is an area where the Tibetans live in compact communities, with people of the Tibetan ethnic group making up 95 percent of the total population of 2.44 million in the autonomous region, and the people of the Han and other ethnic groups accounting for only five percent. According to the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, the state practices the ethnic regional autonomy system in Tibet, which has been established as the Tibet Autonomous Region, and safeguards, according to law, the political rights of the people of all ethnic groups in Tibet to participate in administration of state and local affairs on an equal basis, especially the Tibetan people's autonomous right to independently administer local and ethnic affairs. Practicing ethnic regional autonomy in areas where people of ethnic minorities live in compact communities is a major political system of China and a basic policy of the Chinese Government for solving problems relating to ethnic affairs.

　　1956年4月，根据中央政府决定，成立了西藏自治区筹备委员会。1965年，西藏自治区正式成立，阿沛·阿旺晋美任自治区第一任主席。西藏自治区人民代表大会及西藏自治区人民政府作为自治机关，依法行使自治权。根据中国宪法和《民族区域自治法》规定，民族区域自治地方享有广泛的自治权利，涉及立法、使用民族语言文字、人事管理、经济管理、财政管理、教育管理、文化管理、自然资源的管理和开发等诸多方面。

　　In April 1956, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up in accordance with the Central Government's decision. The Tibet Autonomous Region was formally founded in 1965, with Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme as the first chairman of the Region. As the organs of self-government, the Tibet Autonomous Regional People's Congress and the Regional People's Government exercise the power of autonomy according to law. In accordance with the Chinese Constitution and the Law on Ethnic Regional Autonomy, all areas entitled to ethnic regional autonomy enjoy the extensive rights of autonomy, involving legislation, the use of local spoken and written languages, the administration of personnel, the economy, finance, education and culture, the management and development of natural resources, and other aspects. 

　　作为西藏地方国家权力机关的西藏自治区人民代表大会及其常委会，充分行使宪法和法律赋予的自治权，积极制定适合本民族地区特点的法规。继1965年至1992年制定了《西藏自治区人民代表大会议事规则》、《西藏自治区学习、使用和发展藏语文的若干规定（试行）》等60余件地方性法规之后，近年来又制定了23件地方法规，作出各类法律决定21件，清理修订法规23件，内容涉及政治、经济、文化、教育、环境保护等各个领域。其中包括《西藏自治区环境保护条例》、《西藏自治区乡镇人民代表大会工作条例》、《关于加强对法律、法规实施情况检查监督的若干规定》等，并对14项全国性的法律、法规制定了适合西藏特点的实施办法。在执行全国性法定节日的基础上，西藏自治区立法和行政机关还将“藏历新年”、“雪顿节”等藏民族的传统节日列入自治区的节假日。根据西藏特殊的自然地理因素，自治区把职工的工作时间定为每周35个小时，比全国性法定职工周工作时间少5个小时。据统计，1992年以来，西藏自治区人民代表大会及其常委会根据西藏实际情况制定的有关维护西藏人民利益的立法数量，超过了此前12年的总和。

　　The Tibet Autonomous Regional People's Congress and its Standing Committee -- the local organs of state power in Tibet -- fully exercise the power of autonomy bestowed by the Constitution and law, and have actively formulated laws and regulations appropriate to local ethnic and regional characteristics. Between 1965 and 1992 more than 60 local laws and regulations were worked out, such as the Rules of Procedure of the People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region and the Regulations on the Study, Use and Development of the Tibetan Language in the Tibet Autonomous Region (for trial implementation). In recent years the Region has formulated 23 local laws and regulations, made 21 legal decisions, and cleared up or revised 23 laws and regulations involving politics, the economy, culture, education, environmental protection and other fields, including the Regulations of the Tibet Autonomous Region on Environmental Protection, the Regulations of the Tibet Autonomous Region on the Work of Town and Township People's Congresses and the Regulations on Enhancing the Examination and Supervision of the Implementation of the Laws and Regulations. In addition, rules for the implementation of 14 national laws and regulations conforming to the local features of Tibet have been drawn up. The legislative and administrative organs of the Tibet Autonomous Region have designated the Tibetan New Year, the Sholton and other traditional festivals of the Tibetan ethnic group as the Region's holidays, in addition to the official national holidays. In accordance with the special natural and geographical conditions of Tibet, the autonomous region has decreed a work week of no more than 35 hours, five hours less than the official national work week for workers and staff. According to statistics, the number of laws and regulations worked out since 1992 by the People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region and its Standing Committee to safeguard the interests of the Tibetan people in light of the actual conditions in Tibet exceeds the total formulated during the 12 years preceding 1992. 

　　西藏自治区人大常委会主任和自治区主席均由藏族公民担任。中国宪法和《民族区域自治法》规定：民族自治地方的人民代表大会常务委员会中应当有实行区域自治的民族的公民担任主任或副主任；自治区主席、自治州州长、自治县县长由实行区域自治的民族的公民担任。从西藏自治区成立迄今，先后的4任自治区人民代表大会常委会主任和5任自治区主席均为藏族公民。据统计，目前藏族和其他少数民族人士在自治区人大常委会主任、副主任中占71.4%，在自治区人大常委会委员中占80%；在西藏自治区主席、副主席中占77.8%。在1993年全区乡（镇）、县、地（市）和自治区四级换届选举后，藏族和其他少数民族人士占四级国家政权机关组成人员的93.2%，分别占当选的乡镇长和县长的99.8%和98.6%，分别占自治区、地（市）、县三级人民法院院长和人民检察院检察长的96%和89%。1992年以来，西藏的藏族和其他少数民族干部的培养和选拔有了进一步的发展。据1996年统计，西藏全区藏族和其他少数民族干部比1992年增加18.22%，占干部总数的73.88%，比1992年增长4.48个百分点。

　　The chairman of the Standing Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Regional People's Congress and the chairman of the Tibet Autonomous Region are both citizens of the Tibetan ethnic group. Both the Chinese Constitution and the Law on Ethnic Regional Autonomy specify that the chairmen or vice-chairmen of the standing committees of the people's congresses of ethnic autonomous areas shall be citizens of the ethnic group or groups exercising regional autonomy in the area concerned. The chairman of an autonomous region, the governor of an autonomous prefecture and the head of an autonomous county shall be a citizen of the ethnic group exercising regional autonomy in the area concerned. Since the founding of the Tibet Autonomous Region all the four chairmen of the Standing Committee of the People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region and five chairmen of the Region have been Tibetan citizens. According to statistics, members of the Tibetan and other ethnic minorities now account for 71.4 percent of the chairman and vice-chairmen of the Standing Committee of the People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region; for 80 percent of the members of the Standing Committee of the Autonomous Regional People's Congress; and for 77.8 percent of the chairman and vice-chairmen of the Tibet Autonomous Region. After the election of members to succeeding governments at the township (town), county, prefectural (city) and autonomous regional levels in 1993, members of the Tibetan and other ethnic minorities accounted for 93.2 percent of the component members of the organs of state power at these four levels, respectively for 99.8 percent and 98.6 percent of the township (town) and county heads elected, and respectively 96 percent and 89 percent of the presidents of the people's courts and the procurators of the people's procuratorates at the autonomous regional, prefectural (city) and county levels. Further progress has been made in the training and selection of cadres of Tibetan and other ethnic minorities in Tibet since 1992. According to 1996 statistics the number of cadres belonging to the Tibetan and other ethnic minorities in Tibet had increased by 18.22 percent over the 1992 figure, making up 73.88 percent of the total and showing an increase of 4.48 percentage points over the figure for 1992. 

　　保障藏语文的学习和使用，是维护藏族人民自治权利和行使参与国家和地方事务管理的权利的一个重要方面。中国宪法规定，各民族都有使用和发展自己的语言文字的自由。中国的《民族区域自治法》规定，民族自治地方的自治机关在执行职务时，依照本民族自治地方自治条例的规定，使用当地通用的一种或者几种语言文字。西藏自治区人民代表大会通过的《学习、使用和发展藏语文的若干规定（试行）》据此明确规定，在西藏自治区藏汉语文并重，以藏语文为主。藏语言文字是西藏全区通用的语言文字，人民代表大会通过的决议、法规、法令，各级政府下达的正式文件、发布的公告，都使用藏汉两种文字。在司法诉讼活动中，对藏族诉讼参与人，都使用藏语文审理案件，法律文书都使用藏文。西藏的报刊、广播、电视均使用藏汉两种语言文字，机关、街道、路标和公共设施一律使用藏汉两种文字标记。藏族的学术、文化艺术工作者，都有权使用本民族语言文字撰写和发表学术成果和艺术作品。

　　Guaranteeing the study and use of the Tibetan language is an important aspect of safeguarding the Tibetan people's right to autonomy and exercising their right to participate in the administration of state and local affairs. The Chinese Constitution specifies that all ethnic groups have the freedom to use and develop their own spoken and written languages. China's Law on Ethnic Regional Autonomy stipulates that in performing their functions, the organs of self-government of every ethnic autonomous area, in accordance with the regulations on the exercise of autonomy in those areas, employ the spoken and written languages or languages in common use in the locality. Accordingly, the Regulations on the Study, Use and Development of the Tibetan Language (for trial implementation) adopted by the Tibet Autonomous Regional People's Congress clearly specifies that both Tibetan and Chinese should be used in the Tibet Autonomous Region, with precedence given to the Tibetan language. The Tibetan language is the common language for the whole autonomous region. The resolutions, laws, regulations and decrees adopted by the people's congresses, and official documents and proclamations issued by governments at all levels in the Region are in both Tibetan and Chinese. In court cases involving Tibetans, the Tibetan language must be used in hearing cases, and legal documents must be written in the Tibetan language. Newspapers, magazines, and radio and television stations also use both Tibetan and Chinese languages. All signs and marks of government institutions, streets, roads and public facilities are in both Tibetan and Chinese scripts. Tibetan academic, cultural and art workers have the right to write and publish their academic or artistic works in their own language. 

　　民族区域自治制度的贯彻实施，进一步保障了西藏人民的政治权利，使西藏人民今天所享有的政治权利与旧西藏的状况形成天壤之别。

　　The implementation of the ethnic regional autonomy system has further guaranteed the political rights of the Tibetan people, which is in marked contrast to the situation in old Tibet. 

　　西藏在1959年民主改革之前，是一个比欧洲中世纪还要黑暗的政教合一的封建农奴制社会。占西藏总人口95%的农奴和奴隶被完全剥夺了人身自由和政治权利。农奴主把农奴和奴隶当作私有财产，可以买卖、转让、赠送、抵债和交换。在旧西藏通行了几百年，直到1959年被废止的《十三法典》和《十六法典》，明文将人分成三等九级，规定人们在法律地位上的不平等。法典规定，上等上级的人如王子等，其命价为与其尸体等重的黄金；而下等下级的人如妇女、屠夫、猎户、匠人等，其命价为一根草绳。农奴主以野蛮、残酷的刑罚维护封建农奴制度，动辄对农奴和奴隶实施剜目、割耳、断手、剁脚、投水等骇人听闻的酷刑。

　　Before the Democratic Reform of 1959 Tibet had long been a society languishing under a system of feudal serfdom which intertwined politics with religion, a society which was even darker than the European society of the Middle Ages. The serfs and slaves, making up 95 percent of the total population of Tibet, were completely deprived of personal freedom and political rights. The serf owners considered serfs and slaves as their private property, so they could trade and transfer them, present them as gifts, make them mortgages for debts and exchange them. It was not until 1959 that the 13-Article Code and 16-Article Code, which had been practiced for several hundred years in old Tibet, were abolished, by which codes the Tibetan people were divided, in explicit terms, into three classes and nine ranks and put on an unequal footing in legal status. The codes specified that the lives of people of the highest rank of the upper class, such as a prince, were literally worth their weight in gold, whereas the lives of people of the lowest rank of the lower class, such as women, butchers, hunters and craftsmen, were worth no more than the price of a straw rope. The serf owners safeguarded the feudal serfdom with savage punishments; they would frequently punish serfs and slaves by gouging out their eyes, cutting off their ears, arms or legs, drowning them or inflicting other terrible penalties.

　　民主改革废除了封建农奴制度，西藏人民同全国各族人民一样成为国家和社会的主人，获得了宪法和法律规定的所有公民政治权利。

　　Since the Democratic Reform abolished the feudal serf system, the Tibetan people, like the people of all other ethnic groups throughout the country, have become the masters of their state and society, and won the political rights enjoyed by all citizens as stipulated in the Chinese Constitution and law. 

　　在西藏，年满18周岁的公民，不分民族、种族、性别、职业、家庭出身、宗教信仰、教育程度、财产状况和居住期限，都有选举权和被选举权。他们选举自己的代表，并通过选举产生的各级人民代表大会，行使管理国家和地方事务的权力。据统计，在1993年进行的西藏乡、县、地（市）、自治区四级人民代表大会换届选举中，全区共有选民1311085名，占18岁以上公民的98.6%，其中91.6%的选民参加了选举，有些地方选民参选率达到100%。中国宪法和选举法明确规定，在作为国家最高权力机关的全国人民代表大会中，各少数民族都应当有适当名额的代表。选举法还对少数民族代表的选举作了特殊照顾性的规定，如规定聚居境内同一少数民族的总人口数占境内总人口数30%以上的，每一代表所代表的人口数应相当于当地人民代表大会每一代表所代表的人口数；不足15%的，每一代表所代表的人口数可以适当少于当地人民代表大会每一代表所代表的人口数等。占全国总人口8%的少数民族，目前其在全国人大的代表占代表总数的14%以上。西藏现有20名第九届全国人民代表大会代表，其中藏族和其他少数民族代表占80%。西藏的门巴、珞巴等少数民族虽然人口极少，在全国人大及西藏各级人大中也均有自己的代表。帕巴拉·格列朗杰活佛目前担任第八届全国人大常委会副委员长。

　　All citizens in Tibet who have reached the age of 18 have the right to vote and stand for election, regardless of ethnic group, race, sex, occupation, family background, religious belief, education, property status or length of residence. They elect their own deputies and exercise the power to administer state and local affairs through the people's congresses elected by them. According to statistics, in 1993 when the succeeding township, county, prefectural (city) and autonomous regional people's congresses were elected, Tibet had 1,311,085 voters, making up 98.6 percent of all citizens at or above 18 years of age, 91.6 percent of whom participated in the elections. In some places 100 percent of the voters took part in the elections. Meanwhile, the Chinese Constitution and Electoral Law clearly specify that the National People's Congress, the highest organ of state power, should include an appropriate number of ethnic minority deputies. The Electoral Law contains special regulations to promote the election of deputies from among ethnic minorities. For example, it stipulates that where the total population of an ethnic minority in an area where that ethnic minority lives in concentrated communities exceeds 30 percent of the total local population, the number of people represented by each deputy of that ethnic minority shall be equal to the number of people represented by each of the other deputies to the local people's congress; and that where the total population of an ethnic minority in such an area is less than 15 percent of the total local population, the number of people represented by each deputy of that ethnic minority may appropriately be less than the number of people represented by each of the other deputies to the local people's congress. The ethnic minorities, who make up 8 percent of the total population in China, now account for well over 14 percent of the total number of deputies to the National People's Congress. At present, Tibet has 20 deputies to the Ninth National People's Congress, 80 percent of whom are from the Tibetan or other ethnic minorities. Though the Moinba, Lhoba and other ethnic minorities in Tibet have small populations, each of them has its own deputies to the National People's Congress as well as to the people's congresses at all levels in Tibet. The Living Buddha Phabala Geleg Namgyal is vice-chairman of the Standing Committee of the Eighth National People's Congress. 

　　西藏各阶层和各界人士还通过参与各级政治协商会议，参政议政，行使民主权利。现有多名西藏民族、宗教界人士是全国政协委员、常务委员，阿沛·阿旺晋美担任全国政协副主席。中国人民政治协商会议西藏委员会于1959年成立以来，广泛吸收藏族和其他民族及宗教界人士参加，现有数百名民族、宗教界人士担任委员，拉鲁·次旺多吉、唐麦·贡觉白姆等旧西藏政府时期的贵族均担任了自治区政协副主席。旧西藏法典规定，“勿予妇女议论国事之权”，这种状况在新西藏已不再存在。1996年，西藏自治区人民代表大会中的妇女代表占代表总数的20%。现在，全西藏有县级以上妇女干部573人，并在历史上第一次有了藏族的女法官、女检察官、女警官、女律师。

　　Personages of all strata and all circles in Tibet also participate in the administration and discussion of state affairs, and exercise their democratic rights through attending the political consultative conferences at all levels. Now a number of personages of ethnic minorities origin and religious figures from Tibet are members of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) or its Standing Committee, with Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme serving as vice-chairman of the CPPCC National Committee. Since its founding in 1959, the CPPCC Tibetan Committee has recruited large numbers of people of the Tibetan and other ethnic minorities, as well as religious figures. Now several hundred ethnic-minority people and religious figures are members of the CPPCC Tibet Committee. Even some people who were nobles of the old Tibetan government, such as Lhalu Tsewang Dorje and Domed Konchok Palmo, are currently vice-chairmen of the Tibet Autonomous Region's Political Consultative Conference. The legal codes of old Tibet stipulated: "Women are not to be granted the right to discuss state affairs." This situation is now no longer to be found in new Tibet. In 1996 female deputies to the Tibet Autonomous Region People's Congress made up 20 percent of the total. Now Tibet has 573 women cadres at or above the county level, and some Tibetan female judges, procurators, police officers and lawyers for the first time in Tibetan history. 

　　在西藏自治区，形成了一支以藏族和其他少数民族为主体的司法队伍。西藏自治区司法部门严格依照宪法和法律，保护西藏自治区各族公民的各项基本权利和自由以及其他各项合法权益，保护公共财产和公民私人所有的合法财产，依法惩处各种危害社会的犯罪分子，维护社会秩序。在西藏自治区，犯罪率和监禁率均低于全国平均水平。罪犯的合法权利受到法律保护；少数民族和信仰宗教的罪犯不受歧视，在生活习惯等多方面得到照顾。罪犯在监狱服刑期间的吃、穿、住、用等物质条件由政府予以保障。监狱按罪犯民族生活、饮食习惯设有专灶，每月供应糌巴、酥油茶、甜茶等。西藏监狱均有医疗卫生机构，罪犯拥有医师数高于全国监狱平均水平。罪犯享受国家统一规定的休息日、节假日和民族传统节日。罪犯在服刑期间，可以依法每月会见自己的亲人，可以依法获得减刑或假释和各种奖励。

　　Most staff members of the judiciary of the Tibet Autonomous Region are Tibetans or members of local ethnic minorities. Strictly in accordance with the Constitution and laws, the judicial departments of the Tibet Autonomous Region protect the basic rights and freedoms, and other legal rights and interests of the citizens of all ethnic groups in Tibet. They also protect public property and the lawful private property of the citizens, punish those law-breakers who endanger society, and maintain social order according to law. Both the crime and imprisonment rates of the Tibet Autonomous Region are lower than the nation's average. The legal rights of criminals are protected by law, and those who belong to ethnic minorities or religious sects are not discriminated against, but due consideration is given to their lifestyles and customs. The government guarantees the provision of food, clothing, shelter and articles of daily use for prison inmates. Each prison in Tibet has separate dining facilities and diets for inmates of different ethnic groups and provides for them zanba (roasted highland barley flour), buttered tea, sweet tea, etc. every month. Each prison has a clinic, and the number of prison doctors is higher than the nation's average. Criminals enjoy rest days, holidays and traditional ethnic festivals, in accordance with the state's unified regulations. Prisoners may see visitors every month, may win a reduction of penalty or be released on parole, and may be given various awards according to law.

　　经济发展与人民的生存权和发展权

　　 Economic Development and the People's Rights to Existence and Development

　　加快西藏的经济建设，不断提高人民群众的生活水平，使西藏广大群众享有充分的生存权和发展权，是中央政府关于西藏工作的首要目标，也是西藏自治区各级政府的首要任务。中央政府和西藏地方各级政府为此作出了巨大努力，取得了显著成

　　Speeding up Tibet's economic construction, continuously improving the life of the Tibetan people, and ensuring that they fully enjoy the rights to existence and development are the Central Government's primary goals for its work in Tibet. They are also the most important tasks of governments at all levels in the Tibet Autonomous Region. Outstanding achievements have been made in this regard through the unstinted efforts of the Central Government and the governments at all levels in the Region.

　　1992年以来，西藏经济快速增长。1997年，西藏国内生产总值约73.5亿元，按可比价格计算，比1991年增长96.6%，年均增长11.9%。1987年以来，西藏粮食生产连续十年丰收，1997年粮食总产量达82万吨，创历史最高水平，比1991年的58万吨增长41.4%；肉类总产量达11.9万吨，比1991年增长25.5%。目前，西藏自治区正在为实现2000年前在全区完成脱贫任务，使多数群众达到小康的目标而积极努力。

　　Since 1992 the Tibetan economy has increased rapidly. In 1997 the GDP of Tibet amounted to about 7.35 billion yuan-worth, an increase of 96.6 percent compared to 1991 at constant prices or an average annual increase of 11.9 percent. Since 1987 Tibet has reaped bumper harvests for 10 years in succession. The total grain output was 820,000 tons in 1997, the highest output in Tibetan history and an increase of 41.4 percent compared to the 580,000 tons in 1991. The output of meat was 119,000 tons in 1997, an increase of 25.5 percent compared to 1991. Now the people of the Tibet Autonomous Region are working hard to attain the goal of getting rid of poverty throughout the Region and achieving comfortable lives for most of the people before the year 2000. 

　　1992年以来，西藏加快了与人民群众日常生产、生活有密切关系的交通、能源、通讯等基础设施的建设和建筑业、建材业、轻纺业、食品业、民族手工业的发展。扩建了拉萨贡嘎机场，改建了昌都的邦达机场。现在，西藏每天都有几个航班飞往国内其他城市，每周都有国际航班。西藏已基本建成由航空、公路组成的交通运输网络。1996年，西藏全区公路货运总量比1965年增长14.6倍，客运量增长27.9倍，年均航空客运量达10万人次，大大改变了旧西藏完全靠人背畜驮、交通闭塞的状况。西藏已建成和开通了7个地（市）卫星通信站和51个县的程控电话交换机，98%的县实现了卫星传输和电话的程控化，并进入国内国际长途电话自动交换网。西藏的拉萨、日喀则、那曲、昌都、泽当、狮泉河等主要城镇加快了市政建设。八十年代以来，仅拉萨市对旧民房的改造就完成了30多万平方米，有5226户居民迁入新居。这些建设改善了城乡居民生活环境，提高了生活质量。

　　Since 1992 the building of the parts of the infrastructure closely related to people's everyday life and production, such as communications, energy and telecommunications, and the development of construction, building materials, foodstuffs, traditional handicrafts, textile and other light industries have been quickened. The Gonggar Airport in Lhasa has been extended, and the Bamda Airport in Qamdo has been rebuilt. Now there are scheduled flights to other cities in China from airports in Tibet every day and some weekly international flights. A comprehensive network of communications and transportation consisting of air routes and highways has been basically completed in Tibet. The volume of goods transported via highways in the Region increased 15.6 times in 1996 compared to 1965 and the number of highway passengers has increased by 28.9 times in the same period. The average number of passengers transported by airplanes is 100,000 each year. So transportation conditions have been greatly improved, in striking contrast to the old days when the region was very hard to reach and goods had to be carried in on the backs of animals or people. Satellite telecommunications stations have been built in seven prefectures or cities in Tibet, and program-controlled telephone systems are in use in 51 counties. Satellite transmission and program-controlled telephones are being used in about 98 percent of the counties in Tibet, which is now connected with the international and domestic long-distance telephone automatic exchange networks. Municipal construction has been speeded up in major cities and towns, such as Lhasa, Xigaze, Nagqu, Qamdo, Zetang and Shiquanhe. Since the 1980s more than 300,000 sq m of old residential houses have been rebuilt in Lhasa, and 5,226 households have moved to new dwellings. All this has improved the living environment and quality of life of both urban and rural residents. 

　　西藏的经济发展是在十分原始、落后的基础上起步的，由于平均海拔4000米以上和严寒、缺氧，西藏发展经济的自然条件也十分严酷。加上旧西藏封建农奴制统治下，西藏经济十分落后，人民生活水平低下。鉴于这种情况，中央政府对西藏的发展一直给予特殊的重视，在人力、物力、财力、技术等方面予以大力支持，并根据西藏情况实行特殊的优惠政策。从1980年至今，对西藏的农牧民实行免征免购，农牧民全部收入都归自己所有。近年来，中央政府给西藏的财政定额补贴每年都达12亿元以上，还采取了减轻负担、优惠投资、智力投资、扶贫包干等特殊的措施。从五十年代初至1997年，中央政府共向西藏投入400多亿元；1959年至1996年调运进藏物资674万吨，其中商业物资110万吨，粮食130万吨，石油148万吨。

　　Economic development in Tibet began on an exceedingly primitive and backward foundation. Its natural environment is unfavorable for economic development because of its 4,000-odd-meter altitude, severe cold weather and thin air. In addition, under the rule of the feudal serfdom in old Tibet the economy in the region was extremely backward and the living standards of the people there were low. In view of all this, the Central Government has always attached special importance to the development of Tibet by providing generous assistance in manpower, materials, financial resources and technologies. In addition, preferential policies have been adopted in line with the Region's actual conditions. No levies have been imposed on the peasants and herdsmen in Tibet since 1980 and there is no compulsory state purchase of grain there. The income that Tibetan peasants and herdsmen earn is entirely their own. In recent years the Central Government has allocated upwards of 1.2 billion yuan each year to Tibet as a financial subsidy, and other favorable measures have been adopted, such as lightening its financial burdens, preferential investment, investment in skill training and an aid-the-poor program. From the early 1950s to 1997 the Central Government allocated more than 40 billion yuan for Tibet, and from 1959 to 1996 allotted 6.74 million tons of materials. Among the latter were 1.1 million tons of commercial materials, 1.3 million tons of grain and 1.48 million tons of oil. 

　　国家还根据不同时期西藏经济、社会发展的重点和特殊需要，给予规模较大的集中援建。继1984年由中央政府指导、动员全国9个省市援建西藏43个工程项目后，1994年，中央政府又决定在三四年内由中央政府和全国其他省市无偿援助西藏建设62项工程，包括农业和水利、能源、交通和通讯、工业、社会事业和市政工程等项目。目前，这些项目已大多竣工并交付使用，总投资由原定的23.8亿元增加到36.6亿元。中央政府投资10亿元的“一江两河”（雅鲁藏布江、拉萨河、年楚河）中部流域综合开发项目，自1991年实施至今，开发区域内的粮食产量、农牧民人均纯收入都有大幅度提高。国家投资20.14亿元的羊卓雍湖抽水蓄能电站于1997年竣工、发电。近年来，全国14个对口支援省市还在西藏援建其他建设项目151个，总投资达4.9亿元。这些项目的完成，将使西藏的经济发展水平和城乡居民生活水平跃上一个新的台阶。

　　The state has also given large-scale additional assistance to key and special projects in Tibet in different economic and social development periods. In 1984 some 43 projects were built for Tibet by nine provinces and municipalities mobilized and directed by the Central Government, and in 1994 the Central Government decided to build gratis another 62 projects for Tibet within three or four years, also with the cooperation of other provinces and municipalities of the country, involving agriculture and water conservancy, energy, communications and telecommunications, industry, and social welfare and municipal engineering. Now almost all the projects have been completed and put into use. The actual total investment was 3.66 billion yuan, much more than the planned investment of 2.38 billion yuan. The comprehensive project for the development of the middle valleys of the Yarlungzangbo, Lhasa and Nyangqu rivers, in which the Central Government invested a fund to the tune of one billion yuan, was put into practice in 1991, and since then both the grain yield and the net per-capita income of the peasants and herdsmen in the development area have increased by a wide margin. The Yamzhoyum Lake pumped-storage power station, a project with state investments running to 2.014 billion yuan, was completed and put into operation in 1997. In recent years another 151 projects have been built or are being built in Tibet by 14 other provinces and municipalities, with a total investment of 490 million yuan. The completion of these projects will push the economic development of Tibet and the living standards of both its urban and rural residents a still bigger step forward. 

　　经济的发展，使西藏城乡居民的生活明显改善。1996年，西藏城镇居民人均生活费收入5030元，比1991年增长1.4倍，年均增长19%；农牧民人均纯收入975元，比1991年增长48.3%，年均增长8.2%。1997年，西藏城镇居民人均生活费收入达5130元，农牧民人均纯收入达1040元。西藏城乡居民年底储蓄存款余额由1991年的5.1亿元，增加到1997年的30.45亿元。1996年，西藏人均占有粮食372公斤，比1991年增长28%，在人口增长了约一倍半的情况下，人均占有粮食仍比五十年代初增长了2倍。1996年，西藏人均肉类消费48.6公斤，比1991年增长17.2%。1996年与1991年相比，城镇居民人均消费蔬菜增长26%，消费食用油增长14.5%，消费蛋类增长1.1倍，消费糖果糕点增长3.2倍。随着经济的发展，城乡居民家庭财产日益增多。农牧民家庭大都拥有数量可观的生产资料，平均每户农牧民家庭拥有的生产性固定资产价值达8000元以上。每百户拥有汽车9辆，大小拖拉机6台，机动脱粒机3台，马车12辆。在城镇居民家庭中，家用电器等耐用消费品逐年增加。1996年，平均每百户城市居民家庭拥有彩色电视机88台，黑白电视机6台，洗衣机42台，电冰箱50台，照相机46架，摩托车9辆，自行车222辆，均比1991年有较大幅度增长。据旧西藏地方政府统计，1950年西藏约90%的人口没有自己的住房。现在，除少数牧区外，其他所有的家庭都有固定的住房。1990年到1995年，西藏农村和城镇居民住房面积由人均18.9平方米、11平方米分别增加到20平方米、14平方米。据典型调查，在“一江两河”中部流域，有的农户家庭存有够吃一至三年的余粮，有的乡90%的农户家庭盖了新房。

　　The development of the economy has tangibly improved the lives of all people in Tibet. In 1996 the average annual per capita income that urban residents used for living expenses was 5,030 yuan, 2.4 times that of 1991, showing an average annual increase of 19 percent; the average per capita net income of peasants and herdsmen was 975 yuan, an increase of 48.3 percent compared to 1991 and an average annual increase of 8.2 percent. In 1997, income of the above two types was 5,130 yuan and 1,040 yuan respectively. By the end of 1997 the bank savings deposits of both urban and rural people in Tibet were 3.045 billion yuan, while in 1991 they had been only 510 million yuan. In 1996 the average amount of grain owned by each Tibetan was 372 kg, an increase of 28 percent over 1991. Though the population in 1996 was 2.5 times that in the early 1950s, the amount of grain per capita in Tibet was three times that in the early 1950s. In 1996, the average per capita consumption of meat in Tibet was 48.6 kilograms, an increase of 17.2 percent compared to 1991. In 1996 the average per capita consumption of vegetables by urban dwellers in Tibet had increased by 26 percent and that of edible oil by 14.5 percent over the 1991 figures. Other increases in that year were 2.1 times for eggs and 4.2 times for sweets and cakes. In tandem with the development of the economy, the household property owned by both urban and rural people in Tibet has increased steadily. The peasant and herdsman households own large amounts of means of production, and the average fixed assets for production purpose are worth more than 8,000 yuan per household. There are 9 motor vehicles, 6 big or small tractors, 3 threshing machines and 12 horse-carts per 100 households. The numbers of electrical household appliances and other durable goods are increasing each year in urban families; in 1996 there were 88 color TV sets, 6 black and white TV sets, 42 washing machines, 50 refrigerators, 46 cameras, 9 motorcycles and 222 bicycles per 100 urban families -- all these figures being huge increases compared to 1991. According to statistics of the old local government of Tibet, about 90 percent of the Tibetan population had no residential houses of their own in 1950, but now, except for people living in a small number of pastoral areas, all families have their own permanent houses. From 1990 to 1995 the living space of rural and urban people increased, respectively, from 18.9 sq m to 20 sq m and from 11 sq m to 14 sq m. According to surveys of the middle valleys of the Yarlungzangbo, Lhasa and Nyangqu rivers, some of the peasant families have enough surplus grain to last them for up to three years. Moreover, in some townships 90 percent of the peasant families have built new houses. 

　　西藏自治区的一些偏僻边远地区，部分群众的生活还比较困难，自治区各级政府正在按照中央的指示和要求，实施扶贫攻坚计划，积极帮助当地群众发展生产，以摆脱贫困，走上富裕道路。仅1996年，自治区就投放扶贫资金1.14亿元。1997年9月以来，西藏部分地区，尤其是藏北地区遭受历史上罕见的特大雪灾，给当地的农牧民生产、生活带来很大的困难。国务院专门研究支援西藏的救灾工作。到1998年1月，中央政府先后拨给西藏受灾地区救灾资金4200万元，运去了大量救灾物资。国务院还向灾区派出了慰问组，慰问灾民，察看灾情，帮助解决实际困难。西藏自治区各级政府为这次救灾工作投入了大量人力、物力、财力。这对缓解这次特大雪灾给农牧民生产、生活带来的困难起到了重要作用。

　　Some people in remote areas of the Tibet Autonomous Region still live fairly impoverished lives. The governments at all levels in the Region, according to the instructions and requirements of the Central Government, are implementing a help-the-poor plan to actively assist the local people to raise the level of production so as to get rid of poverty and become well-off. In 1996 alone, the autonomous region earmarked 114 million yuan for the help-the-poor drive. In September 1997, when blizzards rarely seen in local histories hit some of the areas, particularly northern Tibet, causing severe hardship to the peasants and herdsmen in productive work and daily lives, the State Council held a special meeting to discuss how to aid the disaster victims there. By January 1998 the Central Government had allocated a total of 42 million yuan in relief funds and transported a large amount of materials to the disaster areas. In addition, the State Council sent officials to the disaster areas to express sympathy and solicitude for the people, inspect the disaster areas and help solve difficulties. The governments at all levels in the Tibet Autonomous Region devoted a large amount of manpower, materials and capital to the disaster relief work. All this has gone a long way toward relieving the difficulties brought by the blizzards to the peasants and herdsmen in productive work and daily lives. 

　　为了保障各族人民的生活环境，改善生活质量，西藏自治区严格执行国家有关环境保护的法律、法规。自1992年以来又制定颁布了《西藏自治区环境保护条例》等20多件有关生态环境保护方面的地方法规和行政规章。继1990年在拉萨建成西藏第一个现代化环境监测站后，1993年建成了日喀则环境监测站。其他一些环境监测站正在修建，以逐步形成全区环境监测网。环境监测表明，西藏工业“三废”的排放量甚微。工业废气的消烟除尘率达到88%；工业废水的有效处理率在50%以上。主要河流的水质均达到国家地面水环境质量一级标准。湖泊大多数仍处于原生状态，水质保持在国家标准之内。地下水水质总体良好。西藏迄今未发生过一起环境污染事件，没有酸雨，更不存在任何人为放射性污染。环境保护部门多年监测结果证实，西藏环境天然放射性水平在国家辐射保护规定标准内。

　　To ensure a favorable living environment for the people of all ethnic groups and improve their quality of life, the Tibet Autonomous Region strictly implements the state's laws and regulations concerning environmental protection. Since 1992 the autonomous region has formulated and promulgated more than 20 local laws and regulations, and administrative rules on eco-environmental protection, including the Regulations of the Tibet Autonomous Region on Environmental Protection. In 1990 the Region's first modern environmental monitoring station was set up in Lhasa, which was followed by the Xigaze Environmental Monitoring Station set up in 1993. Other monitoring stations are being constructed so as to gradually form a region-wide environmental monitoring network. Monitoring results show low discharge of the "three industrial wastes" (waste gas, waste water and industrial residue) in Tibet: The smoke and dust elimination rate of industrial waste gas has reached 88 percent, and more than 50 percent of industrial waste water has been effectively treated. The quality of the water in the Region's major rivers is up to the state's first-class standard for the environmental quality of surface water. Most lakes in Tibet are still in a pristine state, with the quality of water within the state's standards. In general, the quality of underground water is good. So far not a single environmental pollution accident has occurred in Tibet, and no acid rain has fallen in the Region, let alone any man-made radiation pollution. Moreover, the monitoring findings achieved by the environmental protection departments over the years have proved that the natural radiation level in Tibet is within the standards specified by the state's radiation protection regulations. 

　　西藏人民群众享有充分的生存权和发展权的情况，与旧西藏贫穷、落后，广大群众生存权得不到保障的悲惨状况形成了鲜明的对比。在旧西藏，政教合一的封建农奴制度严重束缚了社会生产力的发展，西藏的经济长期处于极其原始、落后的状态。农业生产基本上为木犁耕地、牦牛踩场脱粒，有的地方还保持着“刀耕火种”的生产方式。1952年，西藏每亩（15亩合1公顷）粮食产量平均只有80公斤，人均占有粮食仅125公斤。旧西藏几乎没有现代意义的工业。1950年，整个西藏只有一个简陋的铸币厂，仅有的一座125千瓦的水电站断续发电，整个西藏的工人总共才120人左右。即使在这种落后的经济状况下，95%以上的社会财富还集中在仅占人口不足5%的官家、贵族、上层僧侣的三大领主手中，而占人口95%的人民群众处于极端贫穷的境地。当时，西藏有句谚语：“（农奴）能带走的只是自己的影子，能留下的只有自己的脚印。”广大农奴和奴隶不仅没有人身自由，生命权也无法保障。在1959年民主改革前，西藏首府拉萨市只有2万多人，而贫民和乞丐就有近千户，时常可见冻饿倒毙街头的无家可归者，情形惨不忍睹。这种景象现在已一去不复返了。

　　The fact that the Tibetan people fully enjoy the rights to existence and development presents a sharp contrast to the miserable conditions in old Tibet where poverty and backwardness prevailed and the people's right to existence was not guaranteed. The feudal serf system that mingled politics with religion in old Tibet seriously hindered the development of the social productive forces. Therefore, for a long time its economy was in a primitive and backward state. Wooden plows were used for agricultural production and yaks were used for threshing. In some places the slash-and-burn method of farming was common. In 1952 the average grain yield per mu (one ha equals 15 mu) was 80 kg and there were only 125 kg of grain per person. In the old days Tibet had almost no industry in the modern sense of the word, and in fact in 1950 it only had one bunthouse of a mint and one 125 kwh hydropower station that generated power only off and on. At that time there were only 120 workers in the whole of Tibet. Even so, more than 95 percent of the social wealth was concentrated in the hands of the three major categories of feudal lords -- government officials, nobles and senior monks, who accounted for less than five percent of the population of Tibet, and the common people, who accounted for 95 percent of the population were extremely poor. There was a saying in old Tibet: "Slaves can only take their shadows away with them and leave only their footprints behind." The broad masses of slaves and serfs did not have any personal freedom, and even their right to life was not guaranteed. Before the Democratic Reform in 1959 the population of Lhasa, the capital of Tibet, was just over 20,000, of whom some 1,000 households were impoverished or begged their living in the streets. It often happened that homeless people died on the roadside because of hunger and cold. But this appalling situation will never appear again in Tibet.

　　人民享有的受教育权利、文化权利和健康保障权利

　　 The People Enjoy the Rights to Education, Culture and Health Protection

　　九十年代以来，西藏的教育、文化和卫生事业得到进一步的发展，促进了人民享有的受教育权利、文化权利和健康保障权利。

　　Since the beginning of the 1990s educational, cultural and health work in Tibet has been further improved, and this has further promoted the people's right to education, culture and health protection. 

　　为发展教育，国家在西藏实行了许多特殊优惠政策，在农村和牧区学校推行寄宿制，对部分藏族中小学学生实行包吃、包穿、包住的政策；在乡镇以上中学和小学逐步实行助学金制度和奖学金制度；各级各类学校在西藏招生实行“以当地民族为主”的原则，对藏族等少数民族的考生实行更加宽松的“适当降低录取分数、择优录取”的招生办法等。

　　The Chinese Government has adopted many preferential policies to promote education in Tibet. Boarding schools have been introduced in rural and pastoral areas, where Tibetan primary and middle school students enjoy free food, clothing and accommodation. Stipend and scholarship systems have been put in place step by step in primary and middle schools above the town level. The principle of "giving priority to people of local ethnic groups" has been adopted by all schools while recruiting students in Tibet, and a flexible enrollment method adopted in dealing with examinees of Tibetan and other ethnic minorities origin, whereby "the pass marks for admission are appropriately lowered and students are chosen on the basis of their test results." 

　　目前，西藏自治区已形成较完备的现代教育体系，教育的普及程度不断提高。1997年，西藏已建立完全小学、村办小学4251所，在校小学生达到300453人，适龄儿童入学率达到78.2%，比1991年提高32.6个百分点。西藏现有中学90所，在校中学生比1991年增加17155人。西藏自治区还办有4所高等院校，16所中等专业技术学校。西藏青壮年文盲率比西藏和平解放前下降41个百分点。

　　Currently, a fairly complete modern education system is being operated in the Tibet Autonomous Region, and education is being spread to wider areas in the Region. According to 1997 statistics, 4,251 regular and village-run primary schools had been established in Tibet, with a total enrollment of 300,453 students. In 1997, 78.2 percent of school-age children were in school, a 32.6 percentage point increase over 1991. There are 90 secondary schools in Tibet, with 17,155 more students enrolled than in 1991. There are also four institutions of higher learning and 16 special secondary schools in Tibet. The illiteracy rate among the young and middle-aged has dropped by 41 percentage points as compared with the figure before the peaceful liberation of Tibet. 

　　1991年至1997年，西藏共新建中学27所、乡完全小学278所、村办小学1359所，新建校舍58万平方米，改造旧校舍30多万平方米。几年来，政府对教育投入逐年增加，1997年，教育投资均占自治区财政预算支出和预算内基建投资总额的18%。这一切都与旧西藏只有少数僧官和贵族的子弟享有受教育的权利，儿童入学率不足2%，广大农奴和奴隶被剥夺了受教育的权利等情形，形成了鲜明的对照。

　　From 1991 to 1997 a total of 580,000 sq m of new schools were built in Tibet, including 27 secondary schools, 278 regular township primary schools and 1,359 village-run primary schools, and a total of over 300,000 sq m of old school buildings renovated. In recent years the government has been investing more and more in education in Tibet. In 1997 such investment accounted for 18 percent equally of the budgeted expenditure and budgeted capital construction investment. These facts are in strong contrast to the situation in Tibet before peaceful liberation, when only a small number of monk officials and children of the nobility had the privilege of studying and less than two percent of the school-age children went to school; education was denied to the masses of serfs and slaves. 

　　从八十年代中期起，中央政府还拨出专款，在内地一些省市创办西藏初中班，在北京、天津、成都各建一所西藏中学，供部分西藏中学生到内地学习。到内地学习的西藏学生的交通、食宿、服装、医疗等经常性费用支出均由国家承担。举办内地西藏班（校），中央政府累计拨出基建专款7300万元，各有关省市财政配套资金1亿多元；中央政府每年拨出600万元，有关省市财政列出专项经费，用于在内地的西藏学生的学习和生活。1985年至1997年，内地各级各类西藏班（校）共招收西藏学生18000人，已有5000多名大、中专毕业生返回西藏参加当地的建设。目前有13000名西藏学生在内地26个省市100多所学校学习。

　　Since the mid-1980s, to make it easier for secondary school students from Tibet to study in inland China the Central Government has appropriated special funds to set up Tibetan junior middle-school classes in some of the provinces and municipalities in the hinterland and one Tibetan middle school each in the cities of Beijing, Tianjin and Chengdu. Transportation, food and board, clothing and medical care expenses of the Tibetan students in those schools are covered by the government. The Central Government has allocated a special capital construction fund totalling 73 million yuan and relevant provinces and municipalities have appropriated necessary funds amounting to well over 100 million yuan for running those Tibetan classes and schools in the hinterland. In addition, the Central Government has appropriated an annual six million yuan and relevant provinces and municipalities have set aside a special fund from their budgets to cover the study and living expenses of the Tibetan students in inland regions. From 1985 to 1997 a total of 18,000 Tibetan students had studied in all these Tibetan classes and schools, of whom more than 5,000 have graduated from special secondary schools, colleges and universities and returned to Tibet to take part in the development of the Region. At present, there are 13,000 Tibetan students studying in more than 100 schools in 26 inland provinces and municipalities. 

　　西藏的优秀传统文化，是中华民族文化的组成部分，国家重视保护和发展西藏的优秀传统文化，发展和繁荣西藏的文化事业。

　　The essence of traditional Tibetan culture is a component part of Chinese national culture and the government has always attached great importance to protecting and developing it and helping it flourish. 

　　具有浓厚民族特色、对西藏优秀传统文化的继承和发展有重要作用的藏学研究事业，得到国家的重视和扶持。目前，全国从事藏学研究的机构有50多个，从事专业研究及其辅助工作的人员有2000多人。其中，国家在首都北京设有中国藏学研究中心；设在西藏的藏学研究机构有10多个，承担并已完成的重大研究课题有100多项。全国各藏学研究机构近年来举办了涉及西藏历史、语言、宗教、民族、哲学、文学、艺术、教育、天文历算、藏医等单科或多学科的学术讨论会60余次，完成的重要课题300多个，已经出版和正在出版的藏学专著、编著400多部。由藏族学者撰写的《西藏通史》、《藏史明镜》等著作获得国内外的好评。

　　With its distinctive ethnic characteristics Tibetological research, which plays an important role in inheriting and developing the essence of traditional Tibetan culture, has received attention and support from the state. Currently, there are over 50 Tibetan studies institutes all over the country, with over 2,000 people engaged in such research and related auxiliary work. The state has set up the Chinese Center for Tibetan Studies in the nation's capital Beijing, and there are a dozen Tibetan studies institutes in Tibet itself, which have completed over 100 significant research projects. In recent years Tibetan studies institutes in China have held more than 60 seminars, single- or multi-disciplinary, on Tibetan history, language, religion, ethnology, philosophy, literature, art, education, calendar and traditional medicine. More than 300 significant projects have been completed and more than 400 books on Tibetan studies have been published or are about to be published. Books such as A General History of Tibet and Mirror of Tibetan History, written by scholars belonging to the Tibetan ethnic group, have received praise from home and abroad.

　　国家重视藏语文在西藏自治区的学习、使用和发展，切实保障藏民族使用和发展本民族语言文字的自由。藏语文是西藏的各级各类学校，以及在内地开设的西藏学校或西藏班学生的主课，要求学生在中学毕业时，具有熟练掌握藏语文读写的能力。西藏已完成义务教育阶段500种中小学教材的藏文编译，并已开展编译出版科技资料藏文目录，搜集整理藏文科技资料的工作。为推动藏语文的规范化、标准化和信息处理现代化，在国家有关部门的大力支持和帮助下，西藏自1994年开始进行“信息技术藏文编码字符集”国际标准的研制工作，并于1996年在丹麦哥本哈根举行的多文种编码国际标准审定会议上获得通过。这为藏语文步入现代信息媒体领域，在网络媒体中实现信息处理和交换，建立了良好的基础。1995年，西藏成立了藏语文术语统一标准化委员会，开始藏语文统一标准化和社会用语规范化。

　　The Chinese Government attaches great importance to learning, using and developing the Tibetan language in the Tibet Autonomous Region and has taken concrete measures to guarantee the freedom of the Tibetan people to use and develop both the spoken and written Tibetan language, which is a main course of study at all schools in Tibet as well as in special Tibetan classes and schools in other parts of the country. Tibetan students are required to read and write the Tibetan language proficiently upon graduation from middle schools. Tibet has finished the editing and translation of 500 kinds of primary and middle school teaching materials for the compulsory education stage. The editing, translating into Tibetan and publishing of a catalogue of technical materials has started, as has the work on the collection and collation of technical materials in the Tibetan language. In order to promote the normalization, standardization and modernization of information processing in Tibetan, the Region has been working on drawing up international standards for Tibetan character coding using information technology since 1994, which has received strong support from related departments of the state. The research project was approved at the conference of international standards verification for multi-language coding held in Copenhagen, Denmark, in 1996. This has laid a good foundation for Tibetan-language access to modern information processing and network exchange. In 1995 a committee for the standardization of Tibetan terminology was set up to standardize the Tibetan language and normalize social terms. 

　　古老的藏医、藏药继续得到重视。目前，西藏共有藏医机构14所，60多个县医院内设有藏医科。全区各级藏医院（科）门诊量达年均50多万人次。每年生产的藏药成品10万公斤，品种350多个。十几种名贵藏药获国家医药产品金、银奖，有的获国际传统医学大会奖。

　　Great importance has been continuously attached to traditional Tibetan medicine and pharmacology. There are 14 Tibetan medicine institutions in the Region, and Tibetan medicine is available in over 60 hospitals at the county level. At present, Tibetan medicine establishments at all levels throughout Tibet give over 500,000 out-patient consultations annually. A total of 100,000 kg in over 350 varieties of finished Tibetan pharmaceuticals is produced each year. Some one dozen valuable Tibetan herbs have won national gold or silver medals or prizes at international conferences on traditional medicine. 

　　对西藏民族民间文化艺术遗产进行大规模、有系统的普查、搜集、采录、整理、研究和编辑出版的工作一直在加紧进行。汇集300多张图片、80余万字的《中国戏曲·西藏卷》已于1993年12月正式出版发行。137万字的《中国歌谣集成·西藏卷》也于1995年出版发行。涉及藏族民间艺术和宗教艺术的总共十大部的文艺集成志书将陆续出齐。《格萨尔王传》是藏族民间艺人创作、加工并一直作为口头说唱艺术在民间流传的英雄史诗，被西藏自治区列为重点研究课题，并设立专门机构进行抢救、整理。有关研究机构已收集民间艺人传唱资料录音5000多盘，录像数百盘，整理出文字4000多万字，发表研究《格萨尔王传》的学术论文1000多篇，出版研究专著30多部。通过努力，使这一长期零散传唱的口头文学变成了一部系统完整的文学巨著。许多藏族学者和宗教界人士称赞这“实现了历代藏族人民的一大心愿”。西藏自治区专门成立了由国家拨款支持的藏文古籍出版社，搜集、整理、出版藏文古籍。大批古藏文书籍、古代木简及金石文字均得到保护。在抢救出版的古籍中，有反映藏民族历史的孤本《德吴宗教渊流》，还有《西藏历代法规选编》、《藏族工艺典籍选编》、《医学论著选编》、《西藏古迹选编》等。

　　The work to systematically investigate, collect, record, collate, study, compile and publish the traditional cultural heritage of Tibet on a large scale is continuing apace. With over 800,000 words and some 300 pictures, the Chinese Drama: Tibetan Volume was published in December, 1993. The 1.37-million-word Collections of Chinese Folk Songs: Tibetan Volume was published in 1995. A 10-volume collection of Tibetan folk and religious arts is to be published one volume at a time. The popular "Life of King Gesar," the oral epic of the Tibetan people handed down for generations by ballad singers, has been included in the Region's key research projects, with a special institute founded to take charge of collecting more than 5,000 cassettes and several hundred video tapes dealing with the epic. In addition, over 40 million words have been collated, and more than 1,000 research papers and over 30 books on the "Life of King Gesar" have been published. This long-scattered oral literature is becoming a systematic, monumental literary work for the first time. Many Tibetan scholars and people in Tibetan religious circles have acclaimed it as "realizing the ardent wish of the Tibetan people of all generations." The Tibetan Ancient Books Publishing House was set up in the Region with state funds to take charge of collecting, editing and publishing Tibetan ancient books. A large number of Tibetan ancient books, inscribed wooden slips and inscriptions on bronzes and stone tablets -- including the only existing copy of the Dewu's History of Buddhism (about the history of the Tibetan people), Selected Tibetan Laws and Regulations of All Periods, Selected Books and Records on Tibetan Handicrafts, Selected Works on Medicine, and Selected Tibetan Historical Relics, as well as others, have been put under state protection. 

　　进入九十年代，西藏基本完成了全区范围内的文物普查，共调查发现各类文物1768处。大批珍贵文物得到全面保护。六十年代以来，国务院公布的西藏辖区内的全国重点文物保护单位18处，并确定西藏自治区重点文物保护单位67处。1994年，著名的布达拉宫被联合国教科文组织列入世界文化遗产名录。西藏自治区档案馆是中国目前保存地方档案最丰富的档案馆之一。1997年10月，由国家投资9000多万元建设的西藏博物馆交付使用，总建筑面积达2.25万平方米。

　　Beginning in the early 1990s, the general survey of cultural relics in the Tibet Autonomous Region is almost finished, with cultural relics found in 1,768 places. Large numbers of rare cultural relics have been put under full protection. Since the 1960s the State Council has put 18 key historical sites in Tibet under state protection and determined 67 key historical sites under regional protection. The famous Potala Palace was inscribed on the World Heritage List by UNESCO in 1994. The Tibet Autonomous Region Archives is one of the best establishments for keeping local archives in China. The Tibetan Museum, funded by the state to the tune of more than 90 million yuan and with a total floor space of 22,500 sq m, was opened in October 1997. 

　　西藏广大人民群众如今拥有充分的创造和享用文化的权利。现有多功能群众文化艺术馆35座，乡村文化室380多个。在西藏广阔的城乡建立了电影放映发行网络，有电影发行放映单位650个，在农牧区实行免费放电影。1996年译制藏语影片25部，拷贝500余个。九十年代以来累计译制藏语影片630多部，8500多个拷贝。西藏现有图书、音像出版社4家，其中西藏人民出版社累计出版图书6589种，7694万册。公开发行的藏文报刊有23种。到1996年，西藏已建成无线电台2座，无线电视台2座，广播发射或转播台35座，电视转播（差转）台240座，卫星地面接收站700多座。投资近亿元的西藏自治区图书馆已于1996年6月正式建成开馆，藏书59万册，其中仅收集、整理和保护的藏文古籍就达10多万册。

　　The people of the Tibet Autonomous Region have full rights to create and enjoy culture. There are 35 multi-purpose people's art and cultural centers and more than 380 rural cultural centers and clubs. A film projection and releasing network covers both urban and rural areas, including 650 local units, giving free film shows to people in agricultural and pastoral areas. In 1996 a total of 25 films in over 500 copies were dubbed in Tibetan. Since the beginning of the 1990s a total of more than 630 films in upwards of 8,500 copies have been dubbed in Tibetan. Meanwhile, Tibet has four book and audio-visual publishing houses, among them the Tibetan People's Publishing House has published 76.94 million copies of books of 6,589 titles. There are 23 Tibetan-language newspapers and magazines in public circulation. By 1996 Tibet had two radio stations, two TV stations, 35 radio broadcasting, relaying and transmitting stations, 240 television transponder stations and over 700 ground satellite receiving stations. The Tibet Autonomous Region Library, set up at a cost of nearly 100 million yuan, was opened in June 1996. It has 590,000 books, including more than 100,000 well-collated and well-preserved Tibetan ancient books. 

　　富有民族特色的文化艺术的繁荣，使西藏广大人民群众的文化生活日益丰富。西藏全区现有以藏族为主体的文艺工作者1万余人，拥有专业艺术表演团体10个，小型专业演出队15个，业余文艺演出队和藏戏队160余个。专业艺术表演团体经常下乡免费为群众演出。此外，还有专门的民族艺术教育、研究机构和文学艺术团体等11个。1996年，西藏专业文学艺术和表演作品获国外大奖1个，全国性奖10个。在藏族的传统节日和重大节庆活动中，如藏历新年、雪顿节、酥油灯节、望果节等，西藏城乡到处都有丰富多彩的民族歌舞艺术表演。九十年代以来，西藏共有30多个歌舞团、艺术团、学术团赴美国、德国、法国、英国、意大利、奥地利等30多个国家和地区进行访问演出和学术交流，同时举办文物、图书、美术、民族服饰、工艺品展览等。

　　The Tibetan people enjoy a cultural life which is becoming more and more prosperous and full of Tibetan characteristics. Now Tibet boasts a contingent of more than 10,000 literary and art workers, with Tibetans as the mainstay, 10 professional art and dance ensembles, 15 small professional performance teams, and over 160 amateur art ensembles and Tibetan opera troupes. People in rural areas can often enjoy free performances given by these professional troupes. In addition, there are another 11 special folk art education and study institutes and literature and art organizations. In 1996 professional Tibetan literature and art works and performances won one international prize and 10 national prizes. During major traditional Tibetan festivals and celebrations, such as the Tibetan New Year, the Sholton Festival, the Great Butter Festival and the Wangkor Festival, varied and colorful folk song and dance performances can be seen all over Tibet. Since the early 1990s more than 30 Tibetan song and dance troupes, art ensembles and academic delegations have visited, given performances, engaged in academic exchanges, and held exhibitions on Tibetan historical relics, books, arts, costume and handicrafts in more than 30 countries and regions, including the United States, Germany, France, England, Italy and Austria. 

　　中央政府和西藏地方各级政府重视西藏人民的健康保障。经过多年不懈的努力，西藏已初步建成遍布城乡的医疗卫生保健网络。1997年末，西藏的卫生机构发展到1324个，比1991年增加127个；医院床位总数6246张，比1991年增加1169张，平均每千人口医院床位超过2.5张；专业卫生技术人员10929人，比1991年增加1189人，平均每千人口医生1.84人，护士0.7人；乡村医生和卫生人员数已达4402人，比1991年增长24.46%。而在封建农奴制度时期的旧西藏，只有三所医疗设备极为简陋的官办藏医机构和少量私人诊所，从业人员不足百人，加上民间藏医也只有400余人。

　　The Central Government and Tibetan governments at all levels are greatly concerned about the health of the Tibetan people. After many years of effort, a basic medical and public health network now covers the whole of the Tibet Autonomous Region. By the end of 1997 Tibet had 1,324 medical and health establishments, 127 more than in 1991; 6,246 hospital beds, 1,169 beds more than in 1991, averaging some 2.5 beds per 1,000 people; 10,929 medical and health personnel, 1,189 more than in 1991; 1.84 doctors and 0.7 nurse per 1,000 people; and 4,402 rural medical and health personnel, a 24.46 percent increase. Old Tibet, under the feudal serfdom, had only three officially operated, small traditional Tibetan medical establishments, with only crude medical equipment, and a few private clinics, employing fewer than 100 medical practitioners. Even including folk doctors of traditional Tibetan medicine, the number totalled only about 400. 

　　国家对西藏群众的医疗实行特殊的优惠政策。在西藏农牧区实行免费医疗，在城镇实行个人医疗资金账户和公助相结合的医疗费用承担办法。1992年至1997年，中央政府和西藏各级政府用于卫生方面的支出共计96461万元。

　　In Tibet a preferential medical policy is being carried out. Medical treatment is free in farming and pastoral areas, and is financed jointly by personal medical insurance and the state in cities and towns. From 1992 to 1997 the Central Government and governments at different levels in Tibet disbursed 964.61 million yuan in expenditures for public medical services. 

　　妇女、儿童的医疗卫生保健工作，在西藏得到重视。到1996年底，西藏有妇幼保健机构34所，爱婴医院8座。108所县以上医院均设有妇产科，110个重点乡设立了妇幼保健室，对25万多名儿童进行了生长发育调查和常见病、多发病的普查普治。从1986年起，在全西藏范围内对儿童实施卡介苗、脊髓灰质炎糖丸、百白破混合制剂和麻疹疫苗的基础免疫，儿童免疫率为85%。7岁以下儿童系统保健覆盖率为51.25%。目前，西藏产妇接受新法接生率为50.8%，拉萨市为100%，在项目县范围内，婴儿死亡率由1989年的91.8‰下降到55.21‰。

　　Much attention has also been devoted to the medical and health care of women and children in Tibet. By the end of 1996 a total of 34 maternity and child care centers and eight baby-friendly hospitals had been set up. In addition, 108 hospitals at and above the county level now have departments of gynecology and obstetrics, and 110 key townships have maternity and child care departments which have monitored the development of more than 250,000 children and given general surveys and treatments of common and frequently-occurring diseases among them. Since 1986 about 85 percent of the children in Tibet have received BCG vaccine inoculations or drugs and inoculations against poliomyelitis, pertussis, diphtheria, tetanus and measles. Now 51.25 percent of children in the Region below the age of seven benefit from the local health care system specially for children. Besides, modern delivery methods are available for 50.8 percent of child-bearing women in Tibet, and the rate reaches 100 percent in Lhasa. In the Region's counties where children's health projects have been carried out, the infant mortality rate has decreased from 91.8 per thousand in 1989 to 55.21 per thousand now.

　　现在的西藏，人民的卫生保健状况与旧西藏不可同日而语。从六十年代起，西藏就消灭了天花病，其他一些危害较大的传染病、地方病也得到了有效控制或被消灭。1996年，伤寒、肝炎、流脑、流感等14种传染病的总发病率和死亡率分别比1991年下降45.52%和67.16%。1995年，西藏已消灭脊髓灰质炎。西藏自治区政府承诺到2000年与全国同步实现消除碘缺乏病。而在旧西藏，天花、鼠疫等烈性传染病屡有发生和流行。据记载，西藏和平解放前的150年间，天花大流行过4次，其中1925年的一次，仅拉萨地区就有7000人丧生。1934年和1937年的两次伤寒流行，拉萨又有5000余人死亡。

　　The sanitation and health conditions of today's Tibet and those of the old Tibet cannot be mentioned in the same breath. Smallpox was eradicated early in the 1960s, and some other dangerous infectious and endemic diseases have also been effectively controlled or wiped out. In 1996 the overall incidence of and the mortality resulting from 14 infectious diseases, such as typhoid fever, hepatitis, epidemic encephalitis and influenza, dropped by 45.52 and 67.16 percent, respectively, compared with the 1991 figures. By 1995 poliomyelitis had been totally eliminated. The government of the Tibet Autonomous Region is determined to keep in step with the other areas of China and stamp out diseases caused by iodine deficiency by the year 2000. In the old Tibet deadly infectious diseases such as smallpox and the plague were endemic. It is recorded that during the 150 years before Tibet was peacefully liberated there were four pandemic outbreaks of smallpox, one of which, in 1925, killed 7,000 people in the Lhasa area alone. Outbreaks of typhoid fever in 1934 and 1937 carried off a total of some 5,000 people in Lhasa. 

　　人民享有的健康保障和生活水平的不断提高，使西藏人口的平均期望寿命从旧西藏的36岁，大幅度提高为目前的65岁。同时，西藏人口也大幅度增加，彻底改变了旧西藏人口增长长期停滞的状况。1734年至1736年间，当时的中国清朝中央政府曾在西藏地区作了详细的户口调查，统计的西藏人口为94.12万人。二百多年后的1953年，西藏地方政府申报的西藏人口为100万。这也就是说，在这二百多年间，西藏人口仅增加5.8万，基本处于停滞状态。而西藏和平解放后，从1953年至1993年，西藏人口从100万增加到230多万，其中藏族人口增加了116万，40年间增加了1倍多。至1996年底，西藏人口已达244万，其中藏族人口占95%。这一事实不仅彻底戳穿了达赖和西方一些人所编造的“西藏人口正在减少”，甚至危言耸听地声称“藏族人正在遭受种族灭绝”的谎言，而且从一个侧面反映了新旧西藏不同的人权状况。

　　The steady improvement of health care and living standards has raised the average life expectancy of Tibetans from 36 years in the old Tibet to the present 65 years. At the same time, the population of Tibet has increased rapidly and the protracted stagnation of population growth in the old days has changed completely. According to a thoroughgoing census carried out in Tibet during the period 1734-1736 by the Central Government of the Qing Dynasty, the population at that time was 941,200. About two hundred years later, in 1953, the local government of Tibet declared its population to be one million. That is to say, the population of Tibet was almost at a standstill for some two hundred years, only slightly rising by 58,000 people. But in the 40 years from 1953 to 1993, after Tibet was peacefully liberated, the population grew from one million to well over 2.3 million, of which the population of Tibetans increased by 1.16 million, or a more than two-fold increase in 40 years. By the end of 1996 the population of Tibet had reached 2.44 million, 95 percent of whom were Tibetans. This lays bare the lie that "The population of Tibet is decreasing," refutes the bluster about "Tibetans suffering from genocide" emanating from the Dalai Lama and some Western sources, and illuminates, from one aspect, the human rights situations in the new and old Tibet.

　　宗教信仰自由的权利

　　 The Right to Freedom of Religious Belief 

中国政府尊重并依法保护公民的宗教信仰自由权利。
The Chinese Government respects and protects its citizens' right to freedom of religious belief in accordance with the law. 
中国宪法规定，宗教信仰自由是公民的一项基本权利。
The Chinese Constitution stipulates that freedom of religious belief is one of the fundamental rights of citizens. 
中国的《民族区域自治法》、《刑法》、《民法通则》、《教育法》、《劳动法》、《人民代表大会选举法》等法律都有保护公民宗教信仰自由权利的具体规定。这些法律规定在西藏得到认真的贯彻执行。在西藏，目前藏传佛教各类宗教活动场所达1787处，住寺僧尼46380人。西藏自治区及所辖7个地市均设有佛教协会，自治区佛教协会办有佛教刊物和藏文印经院。
Specific provisions on the protection of citizens' right to freedom of religious belief are also given in the Law on Ethnic Regional Autonomy, the Criminal Law, the General Rules of the Civil Law, the Education Law, the Labor Law and the Electoral Law Governing the People's Congresses. These laws are strictly observed in Tibet. At present, there are 1,787 sites for Tibetan Buddhist activities in the Region, and there are 46,380 Buddhist monks and nuns living in monasteries. The Tibetan Autonomous Region and the seven prefectures or cities under its jurisdiction all have their own Buddhist associations, and the autonomous regional Buddhist association has its own journal and establishment for printing Tibetan-language scriptures. 

西藏和平解放以来，中国政府一贯尊重和保护藏族群众的宗教信仰自由权利。
Since the peaceful liberation of Tibet the Chinese Government has accorded consistent respect and protection to the Tibetan people's right to freedom of religious belief. 
1951年，中央政府与达赖喇嘛为首的西藏地方政府签订的和平解放西藏的《十七条协议》明确规定，在西藏实行“宗教信仰自由的政策，尊重西藏人民的宗教信仰和风俗习惯，保护喇嘛寺庙。寺庙的收入，中央不予变更”。1959年，西藏实行民主改革。在废除三大领主包括上层僧侣的封建特权，废除剥削制度，实行政教分离的同时，中央政府再次重申要“尊重西藏人民的宗教信仰自由和民俗习惯”，由宗教界人士按民主原则自主管理寺庙。中央政府和西藏自治区政府先后将布达拉宫和大昭寺、札什伦布寺、哲蚌寺、萨迦寺、色拉寺等著名宗教活动场所列为全国或自治区的重点文物保护单位。八十年代以来，国家每年都拨发专项资金和黄金、白银等用于寺庙的维修、修复和保护。国家用于这方面的资金已3亿多元。
In 1951 the Central Government and the local government of Tibet, headed by the Dalai Lama, signed the 17-article Agreement on Measures for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet, which explicitly stipulated that "In Tibet a policy ensuring the people freedom of religious belief will be carried out, the religious beliefs, customs and habits of the Tibetan people will be respected, and the Lamaist monasteries will be properly protected. The Central Government will allow no change in the revenues of monasteries." In 1959, the Democratic Reform started in Tibet. The feudal privileges of the three major categories of feudal lords, including senior monks, as well as the system of exploitation, were abolished, and religion was separated from government. At the same time, the Central Government reaffirmed its stand for "respecting the freedom of religious belief and the customs and habits of the Tibetan people," and that the monasteries should be managed independently and in a democratic way by people of religious persuasion. In addition, the Central Government and the government of the Tibet Autonomous Region have ranked some famous religious sites, such as the Potala Palace and Jokhang Temple, and the Tashilhunpo, Drepung, Sakya and Sera monasteries, among the key historical sites under state or regional protection. Since the early 1980s the state has allocated special funds as well as gold and silver every year for the maintenance, restoration and protection of monasteries in Tibet, to the sum of over 300 million yuan-worth. 

　　到目前为止，由国家和自治区出资维修、修复的著名寺庙有：大昭寺，白居寺，则拉雍仲寺，敏竹寺，兴建于八世纪的桑耶寺，藏传佛教格鲁派四大名寺札什伦布寺和哲蚌寺、色拉寺、甘丹寺，昌都强巴林寺，热振寺，萨迦派的萨迦寺，噶玛噶举派的楚布寺、噶玛丹萨寺，直贡派的直贡帖寺，苯教的墨如寺、热拉拥仲林寺，以及夏鲁派的夏鲁寺等。对布达拉宫的维修，国家共拨专款5500多万元，历时5年多，维修面积达33900平方米。国家资助专款670万元、黄金111公斤、白银2000多公斤及大量珠宝，修复了五世至九世班禅灵塔祀殿。为修建十世班禅灵塔祀殿，国家一次就拨专款6620万元、黄金650公斤。1994年，国家又拨款2000万元，继续修复甘丹寺。

　　The state and the autonomous region have financed the maintenance and restoration of a number of famous monasteries, including the Jokhang, Palkor, Tselayungdrung, Mindrol, Samye (built in the eighth century), Tashilhunpo, Drepung, Sera and Ganden (the latter four being the four main monasteries of the Gelug Sect of Tibetan Buddhism), the Jampa Ling in Qamdo, the Redreng, the Sakya Monastery of the Sakya Sect, the mTshur-phu and Karma-gdan-sa monasteries of the Karma Kagyu Sect, the Drigung Thil Monastery of the Drigung Sect, the Meru and Rala Yungdrung Ling monasteries of the Bon religion, and the Shalu Monastery of the Shalu Sect. The state allocated a special fund of more than 55 million yuan for the five-odd-year renovation of the Potala Palace involving a total floor space of 33,900 sq m. Another special fund of 6.7 million yuan, together with 111 kg of gold and over 2,000 kg of silver and a large amount of gems, has been provided to finance the restoration of the funerary stupas and sacrificial halls of the fifth to the ninth Panchen Lamas. In addition, the state has allocated 66.2 million yuan and 650 kg of gold for the construction of the funerary stupa and sacrificial hall of the 10th Panchen Lama. In 1994 an additional appropriation of 20 million yuan was made to further renovate the Ganden Monastery. 

　　西藏不断加强对宗教典籍的收集、整理、出版和研究工作。九十年代以来，藏文《中华大藏经·丹珠尔》（对勘本）、《藏汉对照西藏大藏经总目录》、《因明七论庄严华释》、《慈氏五论》、《释量论解说·雪域庄严》、《嘛尼全集》等陆续整理出版。已经印出《甘珠尔》大藏经达1490多部，还印出大量藏传佛教的仪轨、传记、论著等经典的单行本，供给寺庙，满足僧尼和信教群众的学修需求。宗教研究机构、高僧、学者的有关佛教专著，如《贝叶经的整理、研究》、《西藏拉萨现存梵文贝叶经的整理》、《西藏宗教源流与教派研究》、《活佛转世制度》、《郭扎佛教史》、《西藏苯教寺庙志》、《中国藏传佛教寺庙》、《西藏佛教寺院壁画艺术》等，都正式出版发行。

　　Much importance has always been attached in Tibet to collecting, editing, publishing and studying ancient religious books and records. Religious books edited and published in the 1990s include the Tibetan-language Chinese Tripitaka -- Tanjur (collated edition), A Tibetan-Chinese General Catalogue of the Tibetan Tripitaka, A Commentary on Tshad-ma sde-bdun, Five Treatises by the Family of Mercy, Annotations on Pramanavarttika Karika -- the Solemn Snowland and the Collected Works of Mani. More than 1,490 copies of the Tanjur of the Tripitaka, and a large number of pamphlets on Tibetan Buddhist practices, biographies of famous monks and treatises on Tibetan Buddhism have been printed to meet the needs of the various monsteries and the Buddhist monks, nuns and lay believers. Treatises on Buddhism written and published by religious research institutions, eminent monks and scholars include Collation and Studies of the Pattra Sutra, Compilation of the Sanskrit Pattra Sutra Extant in Lhasa, Studies of the Origin and Development of Religions and Religious Sects in Tibet, The Reincarnation System of Living Buddhas, History of Buddhism by Guta, Records of the Monasteries of the Tibetan Bon Religion, Tibetan Buddhist Monasteries in China and The Fresco Art of Tibet's Buddhist Monasteries. 

　　在西藏各寺庙开办的学经班中，进行宗教经典研习的学经僧人有3270人。近几年来各教派推荐、输送了50多名活佛、格西和寺庙民主管理组织成员到北京中国藏语系高级佛学院进修深造，已有20多名学僧学成毕业。

　　A total of 3,270 monks in Tibet have studied the Buddhist classics in classes run by monasteries, and more than 50 Living Buddhas, dGe-bshes (Buddhist doctors of divinity) and members of the democratic management bodies of Tibetan temples and monasteries have, in the past few years, taken advanced refresher courses at the China Senior Buddhist Institute of Tibetan Language in Beijing, half of whom have graduated. 

国家尊重活佛转世这一藏传佛教的信仰特点和传承方式，尊重藏传佛教的宗教仪轨和历史定制。
The state holds in great esteem the system of reincarnation of Living Buddhas, which is characteristic of Tibetan Buddhism and an important succession method of the leadership of Tibetan Buddhism, and has profound respect for the religious practices and historical conventions of Tibet's main religion. 
1992年，根据宗教仪轨，国务院宗教事务局批准了第十七世噶玛巴活佛的继任。按照宗教仪轨和历史定制，于1995年经金瓶掣签，并报国务院批准，完成了十世班禅转世灵童的寻访、认定，以及第十一世班禅的册立、坐床、受戒这一佛门盛事。
In 1992 the Religious Affairs Bureau of the State Council approved the succession of the 17th Karmapa Living Buddha, in accordance with Tibet's religious practices. In 1995, a great event in the Buddhist world came to pass when the rite of drawing lots from a golden urn was carried out, and the boy who in Buddhist belief was the reincarnation of the deceased 10th Panchen Lama was identified, confirmed, given the title, enthroned and ordained as the 11th Panchen Lama in accordance with the religious practices and historical conventions and with the approval of the State Council. 

　　各级政府对西藏的各种宗教、各个教派及信教和不信教群众一视同仁，尊重并依法保护各种宗教活动。信教和不信教群众、藏传佛教的各个教派都相互尊重，和睦相处。各寺庙均由民主选举的管理机构，自主地管理寺庙内部的事务。僧尼们自主地学经、辩经、听高僧讲经说法，举行灌顶、受戒活动，传授密宗法要，修习各种仪轨，给信徒们念经、超度亡灵、摸顶祈福等。信徒们可以自由地去寺庙、神山、神湖朝拜，转山、转经、上供、斋僧布施、煨桑、诵经。在西藏到处都可以看到善男信女悬挂的经幡、堆积的刻有佛教经文的嘛呢堆和磕长头、转经、朝拜的信教群众。信教群众家里几乎都设有小经堂和佛龛。据估计，每年到拉萨大昭寺朝佛敬香的信教群众就达上百万人次。

　　Government departments at all levels treat all religions and religious sects, as well as all people, whether religious believers or not, in Tibet, equally and without any discrimination. They respect and protect all religious activities in accordance with the law. Religious and non-religious people, and the different sects of Tibetan Buddhism, in harmonious coexistence, also have mutual respect for each other. The internal affairs of temples and monasteries are independently handled by the management bodies formed through democratic elections. Buddhist monks and nuns, on their own initiative, study and debate the scriptures, attend lectures given by eminent monks, perform Abhiseka (consecration by pouring water on the head) and ordainment, disseminate Esoteric doctrines, perform Buddhist ceremonies, chant scriptures in the presence of believers, release the souls of the dead and pray for blessings by touching the heads. Religious people have the freedom to make pilgrimages to temples and monasteries, and holy mountains and lakes, including circumambulation around holy mountains and spinning prayer wheels. They are also free to offer sacrifices, give food or alms to Buddhist monks and nuns, burn incense and chant scriptures. Prayer banners, cairns of stones with scripture texts painted or carved on them and religious people devoutly prostrating themselves on the ground, spinning prayer wheels or on pilgrimages can be seen everywhere in Tibet; and prayer niches and shrines to Buddha can be found in the houses of almost all religious people. It is estimated that more than one million religious believers go to Jokhang Temple in Lhasa to pay homage and burn incense to Buddha each year.

　　结束语

　　Concluding Remarks

大量事实充分说明，西藏的人权事业在不断进步，中央政府和西藏地方各级政府为保障和促进西藏地区人权事业的发展作出了巨大的努力，西藏人民今天享有的人权是旧西藏无法比拟的。
A host of facts show clearly that human rights in Tibet are making unceasing progress. The Central Government and the local governments at all levels in the Tibet Autonomous Region have made great efforts to safeguard and promote the progress of human rights in Tibet. The situation as regards human rights in old Tibet bears no comparison with the situation in Tibet today. 
西藏人权事业进步和发展的事实，是无可辩驳的。
The fact that human rights in Tibet have improved is beyond all dispute.
这是到过西藏、对西藏历史有所了解的国内外人士都可以得出的公正的结论。
All people, Chinese and foreign, who have been to Tibet and are acquainted with Tibet's history will draw such a fair conclusion. 
达赖诋毁今天西藏的人权状况，但在西藏大规模地粗暴地践踏人权的情形，恰恰是在达赖统治的旧西藏发生的，这是旧西藏残暴、野蛮、黑暗的政教合一制度和封建农奴制度产生的罪恶。流亡在外的达赖对旧西藏普遍的践踏人民群众基本人权的状况只字不提，竭力掩饰，却对新西藏的发展、进步百般诋毁和攻击，以编造耸人听闻的谎言欺骗世界舆论。“妄语戒”是佛教根本戒条之一，达赖肆意编造谎言，违背和践踏这一戒条，这只能向世人暴露其打着宗教旗号进行分裂祖国活动的本来面目。
The Dalai Lama vilifies the present human rights situation in Tibet. But, ironically, under his rule in old Tibet human rights were wantonly trampled on in wide areas -- a crime stemming from the dark, savage and cruel system of merging politics with religion and the feudal serfdom. Making no mention whatsoever of the situation where trampling the people's basic human rights was commonplace in old Tibet, the exiled Dalai Lama has tried by every means to cover it up and vilify and attack the development and progress in new Tibet. He also fabricates sensational lies to befuddle world opinion. One of the fundamental commandments of Buddhism forbids the spreading of falsehoods. The Dalai Lama's wanton fabrication of lies and his violation and trampling of this commandment serve only to expose him in all his true colors: He is waving the banner of religion to conduct activities aimed at splitting the motherland. 

西藏各族人民正在同心同德地建设新西藏。
People of all ethnic groups in Tibet are constructing the new Tibet with one heart and one mind. 
由于西藏经济和社会发展的起点很低，高海拔、严寒和缺氧的自然条件制约着经济的发展，目前西藏的经济和社会发展的水平仍然不高，西藏人民享有的人权还需要进一步改进。
But since Tibet's economic and social development, which started at a very low level, is hampered by unfavorable natural conditions, such as its exceptional elevation, frigid weather and lack of oxygen, Tibet remains economically and socially underdeveloped. As a result, the human rights enjoyed by the Tibetan people have yet to be further improved. 
中央政府和西藏地方各级政府将一如继往地为在西藏发展经济、促进社会发展、不断改善人民生活，作出艰巨的努力，以此来继续推动西藏地区人权事业的进步和发展。
The Central Government and Tibet's local governments at all levels will continue to make painstaking efforts to promote Tibet's economic and social development, consistently improve the people's lives and further promote the progress of human rights in Tibet.

中国海洋事业的发展
The Development of China's Marine Programs 

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China

一九九八年五月，北京
July 1998, Beijing 

  
目   录
Contents 

前   言
Foreword

海洋可持续发展战略    
Sustainable Marine Development Strategy

合理开发利用海洋资源
 Rational Development and Utilization of Marine Resources

保护和保全海洋环境   
 The Protection and Preservation of the Marine Environment

发展海洋科学技术和教育
 The Development of Oceanographic Science, Technology and Education

实施海洋综合管理
 The Imp lementation of Comprehensive Marine Management 

海洋事务的国际合作
 International Cooperation in Maritime Affairs

  
　　前 言

　　Foreword

　　海洋覆盖了地球表面的71%，是全球生命支持系统的一个基本组成部分，也是资源的宝库，环境的重要调节器。人类社会的发展必然会越来越多地依赖海洋。

　　The ocean, which covers 71 percent of the earth's surface, is a basic component of the globaal bio-support system. It is also a treasure house of resources and an important regulator of the environment. It is inevitable that the development of human society will come to depend more and more on the ocean.

　　即将到来的二十一世纪是人类开发利用海洋的新世纪。维护《联合国海洋法公约》确定的国际海洋法律原则，维护海洋健康，保护海洋环境，确保海洋资源的可持续利用和海上安全，已成为人类共同遵守的准则和共同担负的使命。

    In the coming 21st century mankind will have new opportunities to develop and utilize the ocean. Upholding the principles of the international marine law as defined by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, maintaining the wholesomeness of the oceans, protecting the marine environment and guaranteeing the sustainable utilization of marine resources and maritime safety have become common norms for all the people in the world to abide by, and a collective mission for all mankind to undertake. 

    中国是一个发展中的沿海大国。中国高度重视海洋的开发和保护，把发展海洋事业作为国家发展战略，加强海洋综合管理，不断完善海洋法律制度，积极发展海洋科学技术和教育。中国积极参与联合国系统的海洋事务，推进国家间和地区性海洋领域的合作，并认真履行自己承担的义务，为全球海洋开发和保护事业作出了积极贡献。

    As a major developing country with a long coastline, China attaches great importance to marine development and protection, and takes it as the state's development strategy. It is constantly strengthening comprehensive marine management, steadily improving its marine-related laws, and actively developing science, technology and education pertaining to the oceans. China has made positive contributions to international ocean development and protection by participating positively in UN marine affairs, promoting cooperation between countries and regions and conscientiously carrying out its obligations in this field.

    1998年是联合国确定的国际海洋年，中国政府愿借此机会介绍中国海洋事业的发展情况。

    The year 1998 has been designated by the United Nations as the International Ocean Year, and on this occasion the Chinese government would like to introduce the progress of China's work in this particular field to the world.

    海洋可持续发展战

    Sustainable Marine Development Strategy

中国有12亿多人口，陆地自然资源人均占有量低于世界平均水平。
China has a population of more than 1.2 billion, and its land natural resources per capita are lower than the world's average. 

根据中国有关方面的统计：中国有960万平方公里的陆地国土，居世界第三位，但人均占有陆地面积仅有0.008平方公里，远低于世界人均0.3平方公里的水平；全国近年来年平均淡水资源总量为28000亿立方米，居世界第六位，但人均占有量仅为世界平均水平的四分之一；中国陆地矿产资源总量丰富，但人均占有量不到世界人均量的一半。中国作为一个发展中的沿海大国，国民经济要持续发展，必须把海洋的开发和保护作为一项长期的战略任务。
Official statistics show that China has a land area of 9.6 million sq km, making it the third-biggest country in the world. However, the land area per capita is only 0.008 sq km, much lower than the world's average of 0.3 sq km per capita. In recent years China's average annual amount of freshwater resources has been 2,800 billion cu m, ranking sixth in the world; but the amount of freshwater resources per capita is only one fourth of the world's average. China is rich in land mineral resources, but the amount per capita is less than half the figure per capita worldwide. As a major developing country with a long coastline, China, therefore, must take exploitation and protection of the ocean as a long-term strategic task before it can achieve the sustainable development of its national economy.

中国拥有大陆岸线18000多公里，以及面积在500平方米以上的海岛5000多个，岛屿岸线14000多公里；按照《联合国海洋法公约》的规定，中国还对广阔的大陆架和专属经济区行使主权权利和管辖权；中国的海域处在中、低纬度地带，自然环境和资源条件比较优越。中国海域海洋生物物种繁多，已鉴定的达20278种。中国海域已经开发的渔场面积达81.8万平方海里。中国有浅海、滩涂总面积约1333万公顷，按现有的科学水平，可进行人工养殖的水面有260万公顷，已经开发利用的有93.8万公顷。中国海域有30多个沉积盆地，面积近70万平方公里，石油资源量约250亿吨，天然气资源量约8.4万亿立方米。中国沿海共有160多处海湾和几百公里深水岸线，许多岸段适合建设港口，发展海洋运输业。沿海地区共有1500多处旅游娱乐景观资源，适合发展海洋旅游业。
China boasts a mainland coastline of more than 18,000 km. There are more than 5,000 islands in China's territorial waters, each with an area of more than 500 sq m, and the islands' coastlines total more than 14,000 km. China also exercises sovereignty and jurisdiction over the vast continental shelves and exclusive economic zones (EEZs), as defined by the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. Located in medium and low latitudes, China's sea areas have comparatively advantageous natural environmental and resource conditions. Some 20,278 species of sea creatures have been verified there. The fishing grounds that have been developed in China's sea areas cover 818,000 square nautical miles. The shallow seas and tidelands have a total area of 13.33 million ha, of which 2.6 million ha of water surface are suitable for the raising of aquatic products in terms of the current scientific level. So far, 938,000 ha are being utilized for this purpose. Scattered in these offshore waters are more than 30 sedimentation basins, with a total area of nearly 700,000 sq km. It is estimated that there are about 25 billion tons of oil resources and 8.4 trillion cu m of natural gas in these basins. More than 160 bays are spread along China's coasts, plus the deep-water stretches of coast with a total length of several hundred kilometers. Many spots along the coastline are suitable for constructing harbors and developing marine transportation. There are more than 1,500 tourist, scenic and recreational spots favorable for developing marine tourism. 
中国海域还有丰富的海水资源和海洋可再生能源。
In addition, China's offshore areas abound in seawater resources and regenerable marine energy resources.

      1996年中国制定的《中国海洋21世纪议程》，提出了中国海洋事业可持续发展的战略，其基本思路是：有效维护国家海洋权益，合理开发利用海洋资源，切实保护海洋生态环境，实现海洋资源、环境的可持续利用和海洋事业的协调发展。中国在海洋事业发展中遵循以下基本政策和原则：

      The China Ocean Agenda 21 formulated by China in 1996 put forward a sustainable development strategy for China's marine programs. The basic ideas of this strategy are as follows: To effectively safeguard the state's marine rights and interests, rationally develop and utilize marine resources, give positive protection to the marine eco-environment and realize the sustainable utilization of marine resources and the marine environment as well as the coordinated development of the work in this field. In this regard China abides by the following basic policies and principles:

维护国际海洋新秩序和国家海洋权益。
Safeguarding the new international marine order and the state's marine rights and interests. 
1992年2月，中国全国人大常委会通过了《中华人民共和国领海及毗连区法》。这是中国海洋领域的一项重要法律制度，为行使领海主权和毗连区管制权，维护国家安全和海洋权益提供了法律依据。为维护新的国际海洋法律制度和国家海洋权益，全国人大常委会于1996年5月批准了《联合国海洋法公约》，并郑重声明：按照《联合国海洋法公约》的规定，中华人民共和国享有200海里专属经济区和大陆架的主权权利和管辖权；中国将与海岸相向或相邻的国家，通过协商，在国际法基础上，按照公平原则划定各自海洋管辖权界限；中国对《中华人民共和国领海及毗连区法》所列各群岛及岛屿拥有主权。对于中国同邻国在海洋事务方面存在的争议问题，中国政府着眼于和平与发展的大局，主张通过友好协商解决，一时解决不了的，可以搁置争议，加强合作，共同开发。
In February 1992 the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPC) of China adopted the Law of the People's Republic of China on Its Territorial Seas and Adjacent Zones. As China's important law in this particular field, it provides a legal basis for the country to exercise sovereignty over its territorial seas and jurisdiction over the adjacent zones and safeguard the state's safety and marine rights and interests. To uphold the new international marine legal system and the state's marine rights and interests, the NPC Standing Committee approved the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea in May 1996, and solemnly stated: "In accordance with the provisions of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, the People's Republic of China enjoys sovereignty and jurisdiction over the EEZs and continental shelves up to 200 nautical miles off its coasts. Together with the countries with opposite coasts or its neighboring countries, China shall, through consultation and on the basis of international laws and the principle of fairness, fix the dividing lines of each country's marine jurisdiction. China has sovereignty over all archipelagoes and islands listed in the Law of the People's Republic of China on Its Territorial Seas and Adjacent Zones. Regarding disputes over marine issues between China and its neighboring countries, the Chinese government shall, in view of the vital interests bearing on peace and development, stand for their settlement through friendly consultation. With regard to issues that cannot be solved for the time being, China stands for pigeonholing them and for strengthened cooperation and joint development.

统筹规划海洋的开发和整治。
Overall planning for marine development and control. 
加强海岸带的综合开发和管理，合理开发保护近海，积极参与国际海底和大洋的开发利用；沿海陆地区域海洋区域一体化开发，逐步形成临海经济带和海洋经济区，推动沿海地区的进一步繁荣和发展。
China will strengthen the comprehensive development and administration of its coastal zones, rationally develop and protect the offshore areas, actively participate in the development and utilization of international seabeds and oceans, and exploit the coastal land and sea areas in a unified way in order to gradually form coastal economic belts and marine economic zones, thus making the coastal areas more prosperous and developed.

      合理利用海洋资源，促进海洋产业协调发展。实行开发与保护并重的方针，确保海洋资源可持续利用；综合开发利用海洋资源；不断发现新资源，利用新技术，形成和发展海洋新产业，推动海洋经济持续、快速、健康发展。
Rationally utilizing marine resources and promoting the coordinated development of the marine industries. China adopts the policy of placing equal stress on development and protection, to guarantee the sustainable utilization of marine resources. It will comprehensively develop and utilize its marine resources, continue to explore the oceans for new resources, make use of new technologies, and form and develop new marine industries to promote the sustained, rapid and healthy development of the marine economy.

      海洋资源开发和海洋环境保护同步规划、同步实施。制定海洋开发和海洋生态环境保护协调发展规划，按照预防为主、防治结合，谁污染谁治理的原则，加强海洋环境监测、监视和执法管理；重点加强陆源污染物管理，实行污染物总量控制制度，防止海洋环境退化。

      Simultaneously planning and implementing the development of marine resources and the protection of the marine environment. China will work out a program for the coordinated development of marine resources and the protection of the marine eco-environment and, in line with the principles of "putting prevention first, combining prevention with control" and "making the causer of pollution responsible for treating it," improve the monitoring, surveillance, law enforcement and management of the marine environment. Stress will be laid on strengthening the control of land-sourced pollutants and implementing the system for controlling the total quantity of pollutants, in order to prevent the marine environment degenerating.

      加强海洋科学技术研究与开发。重视基础研究，组织海洋关键技术攻关，发展海洋高技术，不断提高海洋开发和海洋服务领域的技术水平；加快先进适用技术的推广应用，不断缩小地区间海洋开发技术水平的梯度差；健全高等院校的海洋专业，加强职业教育，培育多层次的海洋科技人才，同时也加强公众海洋知识传播。

      Reinforcing oceanographic technology research and development. China will pay attention to basic research and marshal all necessary forces to tackle key oceanographic problems, develop marine high-techs, and constantly improve the technological levels of marine development and services. It will speed up the promotion and utilization of advanced and applicable technologies, and consistently narrow the differences between the regions in terms of the technological level of marine development. Furthermore, the discipline of oceanography will be further emphasized in institutions of higher learning, including vocational education, and oceanographic personnel of various levels will be trained. At the same time, oceanographic knowledge will be spread among the general public.

      建立海洋综合管理制度。不断完善海洋功能区划和规划，加强海洋开发和保护以及海域使用的科学管理；积极进行海岸带综合管理试验，逐步建立海岸带综合管理制度。

      Setting up a comprehensive marine management system. China will continue to improve its marine function zoning and planning and strengthen the scientific management of marine development and protection, as well as the utilization of sea areas. Experiments in the comprehensive management of the coastal zones will be actively carried out, and a comprehensive control system will be gradually put in place.

      积极参与海洋领域的国际合作。认真履行《联合国海洋法公约》规定的义务，积极参与国际海洋事务，推动国际和地区性海洋事务的合作与交流，促进全球海洋事业的繁荣和发展。

      Actively participating in international cooperation in the field of marine development. China will conscientiously fulfill the obligations defined in the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, actively take part in international marine affairs, promote international and regional cooperation and exchanges related to oceanic matters, and contribute its full share to the prosperity and development of the world's work in this field.

    合理开发利用海洋资源

     Rational Development and Utilization of Marine Resources

    依据海洋资源的承载能力，中国采取综合开发利用海洋资源的政策，以促进海洋产业的协调发展。近年来，中国不断改造海洋捕捞业、运输业和海水制盐业等传统产业；大力发展海洋增养殖业、油气业、旅游业和医药业等新兴产业；积极勘探新的可开发海洋资源，促进深海采矿、海水综合利用、海洋能发电等潜在海洋产业的形成和发展。1997年，中国的海洋渔业、海盐和盐化工业以及海洋运输业、造船业、油气业和旅游业等主要海洋产业的总产值达3000多亿元，成为国民经济发展的积极推动力量。

    In the light of the bearing capacity of marine resources, China adopts a policy of developing and utilizing them in a comprehensive way, so as to promote the coordinated development of the marine industries. In recent years China has made constant efforts to upgrade the maritime fishing, transportation, salt-making and other traditional industries. At the same time, it has spared no effort to develop the industry of marine reproduction and mariculture, offshore oil and gas, tourism, marine pharmaceuticals and other burgeoning industries. It has actively explored new marine resources as far as possible, and promoted the formation and development of some potential marine industries, such as deep-water mining, comprehensive utilization of seawater, and power generation with marine energy. In 1997 the total output value of the major marine industries, including ocean fishing, salt-making, the salt chemicals industry, marine transportation, shipbuilding, offshore oil and gas, and tourism, topped 300 billion yuan. As a result, these industries have become forces actively promoting the development of China's economy as a whole.

中国有悠久的海洋渔业发展史，积累了丰富的经验。
China's ocean fishing industry has a long history steeped in experience. 
中国渔业的发展，坚持“加速发展养殖，养护和合理利用近海资源，积极扩大远洋渔业，狠抓加工流通，强化法制管理”的方针。八十年代中期以来，中国的海水养殖业迅速发展，养殖的种类增多，区域扩大。海水养殖产量从1987年的192.6万吨增加到1997年的791万吨，占海洋渔业产量的比重从27%上升到36%。根据海洋渔业资源的实际情况，中国积极调整海洋捕捞结构，养护和合理利用近海渔业资源，积极开发新资源、新渔场，使捕捞业不断适应资源结构的变化。1997年，中国海洋捕捞总产量1385.4万吨。中国发展远洋渔业和国际渔业合作，本着严格遵守有关国际海洋法，并充分注意保护生态环境，在平等互利、合理开发可利用资源、不损害别国利益的原则基础上，积极开展同有关国家和地区的渔业合作，共同发展渔业经济。八十年代以来，中国与30多个国家和地区建立了渔业合作关系。

    In developing this sector, the country adheres to the principle of "speeding up the development of aquaculture, conserving and rationally utilizing offshore resources, actively expanding deep-sea fishing, emphasizing processing and circulation, and strengthening legal administration". Since the mid-1980s, China's saltwater aquaculture has developed rapidly, with a large increase in species and expansion of breeding areas. The output of such products rose from 1.926 million tons in 1987 to 7.91 million tons in 1997, with their proportion in the total output of the maritime harvest rising from 27 percent to 36 percent. In accordance with the actual conditions of marine fisheries resources, China has actively readjusted the structure of this sector, made efforts to conserve and rationally utilize off-shore fisheries resources, and actively exploited new resources and fishing grounds, so as to make the fishing industry constantly adapt to the changes in the structure of marine resources. In 1997 the total output of China's ocean fishing industry came to 13.854 million tons. While expanding deep-sea fishing and international fishing cooperation, China adheres strictly to relevant international maritime laws, pays full attention to protection of the eco-environment and, in the light of the principle of "equality, mutual benefit, rational development of the exploitable resources, and abstention from infringement on the interests of other countries" actively develops fishing cooperation with relevant countries and regions, in order to jointly expand the fishing economy. Since the 1980s, China has established cooperative fishing relations with more than 30 countries and regions.

中国重视海洋渔业资源的保护工作，采取了各种养护渔业资源的措施，以保障海洋可持续发展战略的实施。
China attaches great importance to the protection of marine fisheries resources, and has adopted various measures to conserve such resources so as to guarantee the implementation of a sustainable marine development strategy. 
中国先后建立了各种禁渔期、禁渔区、保护区和休渔制度，取缔有害渔具渔法，限制网目尺寸和幼鱼比例。中国早在1979年就开始实行了捕捞许可证制度，限制捕捞强度的盲目增长，并从1987年开始实行渔船马力控制指标政策。从1995年起，中国实行新的伏季休渔制度，每年的7月至8月，在北纬27度以北海域全面休渔，取得了明显的经济、生态和社会效益。从今年起，中国伏季休渔的范围扩大到北纬26度，休渔时间延长至3个月。中国重视渔业资源的增殖工作，多年来一直坚持对虾和其他品种的增殖放流，取得了积极成果。
It has done this by instituting various closed fishing seasons, closed fishing areas, marine sanctuaries and moratorium systems, banning harmful fishing gear and methods, and restricting the size of net meshes and the proportion of young fish. In 1979 China began to adopt a fishing permit system to curb reckless fishing, and in 1987 the country began to control fishing boats' horsepower. Since 1995 China has practiced a new midsummer moratorium systemevery year during July and August fishing is banned in the sea areas north of 27 degrees north latitude. The new system has achieved encouraging economic, ecological and social results, and from this year the midsummer moratorium area will be expanded to 26 degrees north latitude and its duration will be lengthened to three months. China attaches great importance to the marine reproduction and the reproduction of fisheries resources, and has always insisted on the marine reproduction and releasing of prawns and other species, a measure which has achieved positive results.


    中国自六十年代开始进行海洋油气资源的自营勘探开发，八十年代开始吸引外国资金和技术，进行合作勘探开发。中国的海洋石油天然气开发实行油气并重，向气倾斜，自营勘探开发与对外合作相结合，上下游一体化的政策，并取得了重大进展。到1997年底，中国已与18个国家和地区的67个石油公司签订了131项合同和协议，引进资金近60亿美元；发现含油气构造100多个，找到石油地质储量17亿吨，天然气3500亿立方米；已有20个油气田投入开发，形成了海洋石油天然气产业。1997年，中国海洋石油产量超过1629万吨，天然气产量为40亿立方米。

    As far back as in the 1960s China began to explore and exploit offshore oil and gas resources on its own. In the 1980s it started to absorb foreign capital and technology to develop this industry in cooperation with foreign companies. In exploiting offshore oil and natural gas, China follows the policy of placing equal stress on oil and gas, with the balance inclined slightly toward gas, combining domestic exploration and exploitation with cooperation with foreign companies, and integrating upstream and downstream. As a result, great progress has been made. By the end of 1997 China had signed 131 contracts and agreements with 67 oil companies from 18 countries and regions and imported a total capital of close to six billion US dollars for this industry. At the same time, more than 100 structures with oil and gas had been discovered, and 1.7 billion tons of oil reserves and 350 billion cu m of natural gas had been found. Twenty oil and gas fields are under development. With an offshore oil and natural gas industry in place, in 1997 China's offshore oil output exceeded 16.29 million tons, and its natural gas output stood at four billion cu m.

    中国制定了深水深用、合理利用岸线资源的政策，一切深水岸线优先用于港口建设，积极发展海洋运输业。新中国成立以来，特别是改革开放以来，海洋运输业的发展取得了很大成绩。到1997年底，中国民用船舶已发展到32万艘，近5000万载重吨，其中从事外贸运输的船队达2300多万载重吨。中国的港口建设和海洋运输依据建设水运主通道、港口主枢纽和水运支持保障系统的规划设想，以集装箱、煤炭、石油、矿石、粮食等大宗货物专业化泊位建设为重点，配套建设后方集疏运通路，加快装运卸系统建设，建设干线与支线衔接、装卸配套技术先进的集装箱运输系统，同时强化老港口技术改造，提高吞吐能力和效率。目前，中国共有年吞吐量1000万吨以上的海港15个。1997年，沿海主要海港货物吞吐总量达9.05亿吨。近年来，中国沿海造船业呈高速发展态势，1997年造船总吨位居世界第三。

    China has worked out a policy of utilizing its deep-sea waters and coastal resources in a rational way. According to the policy, priority shall be given to the construction of harbors in deepwater coastal areas, and vigorous efforts will be made to develop marine transportation. Significant achievements have been attained in marine transportation development since the founding of New China, especially since the implementation of reform and opening to the outside world. By the end of 1997, merchant ships had increased to 320,000 with a total deadweight tonnage of close to 50 million, of which more than 23 million were of the fleets in foreign trade transportation. Harbor construction and marine transportation in China are based on the planning concept of constructing major waterways, harbor hubs and water transport support system. China will put special efforts into the construction of specialized berths for bulk goods such as containers, coal, oil, ore and grain, set up collection and distribution channels in the rear, speed up the establishment of a modern loading-unloading-hauling system, and construct a container transport system with advanced freight-handling technologies and featuring a combination of trunk lines with branch lines while strengthening the technical transformation of old harbors to improve their handling capacity and efficiency. At present, China has 15 harbors each with an annual handling capacity of more than 10 million tons. In 1997 the volume of freight handled by the country's major coastal harbors totaled 905 million tons. In recent years China's coastal shipbuilding industry has shown a trend of rapid development, and in 1997 China's shipbuilding tonnage ranked third in the world.

    中国的海洋旅游业采取依托沿海城市，突出海洋特色，分区分片建设的政策。近年来，沿海地区开发建设了300多处海洋和海岛旅游娱乐区，兴建了各具特色的旅游娱乐设施，使海洋旅游业成为迅速发展的新兴海洋产业。1997年，中国海洋旅游共接待境外游客超过1000万人次。

    China's marine tourism development policy features relying on the coastal cities, stressing marine characteristics, and developing it region by region and sector by sector. In recent years, the coastal areas have created more than 300 marine and island tourism and recreational zones, with a variety of marine features. Marine tourism is now a burgeoning industry. In 1997 this sector received more than 10 million overseas tourists.

    中国是世界上最早利用海水制盐的国家之一。目前，海水资源开发采取以盐为主、盐化结合，积极发展海水综合利用的方针，形成了盐业、盐化工业，以及海水直接利用和海水淡化等新兴产业。中国有盐田面积43万公顷，1997年生产原盐2928.1万吨。中国的盐化工业产品主要有氯化钾、溴素、无水硝、氯化镁等，其中氯化钾、溴素等总产量超过50万吨。天津、大连、青岛、烟台、秦皇岛等沿海城市，都在扩大直接利用海水作为工业冷却水和大生活用水，这对于缓解中国淡水资源严重短缺的状况意义重大。

    China was one of the world's pioneers in making salt from seawater. Some of China's new industries are associated with this aspect of marine resources development and exploitation: salt, salt chemicals, direct seawater utilization and seawater desalination. With an area of 430,000 ha, China's salt pans produced 29.281 million tons of raw salt in 1997. The major salt chemical products are potassium chloride, bromide, anhydrous nitre and magnesium chloride. The annual output of potassium chloride and bromide each exceeds 500,000 tons. In addition, Tianjin, Dalian, Qingdao, Yantai, Qinhuangdao and other coastal cities are now making efforts to use more seawater directly as industrial chilled water and non-potable water, which is of great significance for alleviating China's serious shortage of freshwater resources.

    中国政府把大洋矿产资源勘探开发列为国家长远发展项目给予专项投资，成立了负责协调、管理中国在国际海底区域进行勘探开发活动的专门机构。中国是国际海底区域第五大投资国，并在国际海底区域获得了7.5万平方公里的专属勘探开发区。今后，中国将一如既往地积极参与国际海底的管理和开发活动，发展勘探开发新技术，为全人类和平利用国际海底资源作出应有的贡献。

    The Chinese government has listed the exploration and exploitation of the mineral resources of the Pacific Ocean as a long-term development project for which it intends to offer special investment. Meanwhile, it has established a special institution in charge of coordinating and administering China's exploratory and exploitative activities in the international seabed region. China is the fifth-largest investor in international efforts for seabed development, and has obtained an exclusive exploration and development area of 75,000 sq km. In the future, China will continue to actively participate in the administration and development of international seabed areas, and develop new exploration and exploitation technologies to make its due contribution to the peaceful utilization of international seabed resources for the benefit of the whole of mankind.

    保护和保全海洋环境

     The Protection and Preservation of the Marine Environment

    中国十分重视海洋环境保护工作，逐步建立了海洋环境保护机构和海洋环境保护法规体系，社会各界保护海洋的意识和法制观念不断增强，海洋环境保护事业不断取得新进展。由于海洋环境保护工作不断加强，在沿海地区国民经济快速增长，入海污染物急剧增加的情况下，污染严重恶化的势头得到缓解，局部海区的环境质量得到改善，并使大面积海域水质基本保持在良好的状态。

    China attaches great importance to the protection of the marine environment. Organs and laws aimed at marine environmental protection have been gradually established, and the people's consciousness of the importance of protecting the marine environment and abiding by the laws have been further strengthened, both of which have speeded up the work of marine environmental protection. As a result, the momentum of serious marine pollution has been slowed; the environmental quality of some of the country's sea areas has been improved; and most offshore waters are of good quality, despite the drastic increase in the amounts of pollutants brought about by the booming economy of the coastal areas.

    1982年，中国全国人大常委会通过了《中华人民共和国海洋环境保护法》。这是中国保护海洋环境的基本法律，对防止因海岸工程建设、海洋石油勘探开发、船舶航行、废物倾倒、陆源污染物排入而损害海洋环境等作了法律规定。中国政府还颁布了《中华人民共和国防止船舶污染海域管理条例》、《中华人民共和国海洋石油勘探开发环境保护管理条例》、《中华人民共和国海洋倾废管理条例》、《中华人民共和国防止拆船污染环境管理条例》、《中华人民共和国防止陆源污染物污染损害海洋环境管理条例》和《中华人民共和国防止海岸工程建设项目污染损害海洋环境管理条例》，以及10余项政府各部门制定的海洋环境保护规章和保护标准等，形成了海洋环境保护法律体系。国家有关部门还制定了海洋环境保护规划和计划，以及湿地保护、生物多样性保护等专业计划，建立了全海域海洋监测网和近岸海域环境监测网。

    In 1982 the Marine Environmental Protection Law of the People's Republic of China, a basic law of the country to protect the marine environment, was approved by the NPC Standing Committee to prevent damage to the marine environment resulting from coastal construction projects, offshore oil exploration and exploitation, navigation of ships, wastes dumping, and discharge of land-sourced pollutants. Later, several concrete regulations were issued by the Chinese government, such as the Regulations of the People's Republic of China on the Prevention and Control of Marine Pollution Caused by Ships, Regulations of the People's Republic of China on Environmental Protection and Control Pertaining to Offshore Oil Exploration and Exploitation, Regulations of the People's Republic of China on Control of the Marine Dumping of Wastes, Regulations of the People's Republic of China on the Prevention and Control of Environmental Pollution from Shipbreaking, Regulations of the People's Republic of China on the Prevention and Control of Pollution Damage to the Marine Environment from Land-Sourced Pollutants, and Regulations of the People's Republic of China on the Prevention and Control of Pollution Damage to the Marine Environment from Coastal Construction Projects. In addition, a dozen rules and standards were enacted concerning marine environmental protection by government departments. All of these laws, regulations and rules have formed a legal framework for marine environmental protection. Besides, programs and plans for marine environmental protection, professional plans for the protection of wetlands and biological diversity, an overall marine monitoring network and a nearshore environmental monitoring network have also been put in place by related state organizations.

    近年来，中国逐步建立了海洋环境保护管理体制。国家环境保护部门主管全国海洋环境保护工作；国家海洋管理部门负责组织海洋环境的调查、监测、监视，开展科学研究，并主管防止海洋石油勘探开发和海洋倾废污染损害的环境保护工作；国家港务监督机构负责船舶排污的监督和调查处理，以及港区水域的监视，并主管防止船舶污染损害的环境保护工作；国家渔政渔港监督机构负责渔港船舶排污的监督和渔业港区水域的监视；军队环境保护部门负责军用船舶排污的监督和军港水域的监视；沿海地方人民政府环境保护部门主管防止海岸工程和陆源污染物污染损害的环境保护工作等等。这一分工合作的管理体制，对确保海洋环境保护法律的实施及有效保护海洋环境发挥了重要作用。

    In recent years, an administration system for marine environmental protection has been gradually set up: State environmental protection departments are in charge of marine environmental protection for the whole country; state marine administrations are responsible for the organization of survey, monitoring and surveillance of the marine environment, the conduct of scientific research and the prevention of pollution damage to the marine environment resulting from offshore oil exploration and exploitation and the dumping of wastes at sea; state harbor administrations are responsible for the supervision, investigation and disposal of pollutant discharge by ships, the surveillance of harbor waters and the prevention of pollution damage to the marine environment caused by vessels; state fishing port administrations are responsible for the supervision of pollutant discharge by fishing boats and the surveillance of fishing grounds; environmental protection organs of the armed forces are responsible for the supervision of pollutant discharge by military vessels and surveillance of naval port waters; and environmental protection organs of the local people's governments in coastal areas are responsible for the environmental protection work of preventing pollution damage resulting from coastal construction projects and land-sourced pollutants. This coordinated network plays an important role in the implementation of the related laws and the efficient protection of the marine environment.

    中国的海洋污染管理贯彻预防为主、防治结合的方针。在做好海洋生物资源保护和海上污染防治的同时，把防治陆源性污染作为海洋环保的重点。在控制陆源污染方面建立了一系列制度，加强重点排污口的监测、监视和管理。大中城市不断调整工业布局，加强技术改造，开展三废综合利用，对污染严重的企业限期治理或关、停、并、转、迁，还建设了一批污水处理厂，控制新污染源，减少了陆源污染物入海量。为防止船舶和港口污染海洋，各类船舶均按规定装备了油水分离装置，编制了《船上油污应急计划》。港口普遍建设了含油污水接收处理设施和应急器材，每年处理船舶含油污水370万吨，回收废油4.2万吨。为了防止海上石油开发对海洋环境的污染，采油平台全部配备了含油污水处理装置，钻井船舶全部配备了机舱油水分离装置，各油田都配备了围油栏、化学消油剂，以及溢油回收船。海上油田还制定了《海洋石油勘探开发溢油应急计划》。

    China carries out the policy of putting prevention first and combining prevention with control in managing existing marine pollution. While endeavoring to make a success in the protection of marine biological resources and the prevention and control of marine pollution, China makes the prevention and control of land-sourced pollution the focal point of its marine environmental protection work. A series of regulations have been drawn up to check land-sourced pollutant emission, and enhance the monitoring, surveillance and control of the main pollutant-emission outlets. Large and medium-sized cities have paid constant attention to readjusting the distribution of industries, improving technical transformation, and recovering waste gas, waste water and industrial residue (the "three wastes") for multipurpose use. Enterprises creating serious pollution are required to take effective measures to control it within a definite period of time; otherwise they have to close down, suspend operations, merge with other plants, change their products or move to other places. Besides, a number of sewage treatment plants have been built to control new pollution sources and reduce the amount of land-sourced pollutants dumped into the sea. To prevent marine pollution resulting from ship and port discharge, in addition to the formulation of the Crash Program to Combat Ships' Oil Pollution, oil-water separators have been installed aboard ships of all types in accordance with relevant stipulations, and oil-polluted water treatment equipment, including emergency treatment equipment, has been installed at all sea ports. This equipment can help dispose of 3.7 million tons of oil-polluted water from vessels and recover 42,000 tons of waste oil a year. Similarly, to prevent marine environment pollution resulting from offshore oil exploitation, besides the formulation by offshore oilfields of the Crash Program to Combat Oil Spills During Offshore Oil Exploration and Exploitation, oil-polluted water treatment equipment has been installed on all drilling platforms, engine-room oil-water separators have also been installed aboard all drilling ships, and oil barriers, chemical de-oiling agents and spill recovery ships provided in all China's offshore oilfields.

    作为《1972年防止倾倒废物及其他物质污染海洋的公约》（伦敦倾废公约）的缔约国，中国重视执行该公约的规定，并不断加强对海洋倾废的管理。到目前为止，中国已建立了34个三类疏浚物倾倒区，4个空中放油区，签发倾倒许可证近2000份。同时，大力加强倾倒区的环境质量监测工作。中国严格禁止在海上处置一切放射性物质，逐步停止海上倾倒工业废物，并禁止有毒废物海上焚烧。

    As one of the contracting parties to the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matters signed in 1972 in London, China attaches great importance to the fulfillment of the provisions under the convention and is steadily improving its control of the dumping of wastes into the sea. So far, China has designated 34 dumping areas for dredged materials of the third category and four areas for midair oil discharge. It has issued about 2,000 dumping permits and tightened up the monitoring of the environmental quality of dumping areas. Besides, it has strictly prohibited the disposal of any radioactive substance and incineration of toxic waste at sea, and plans to gradually stop the dumping of industrial waste into the sea.

    为了保护渔业水域的生态环境，中国政府制定了《渔业水质标准》，有关部门还制定了《贝类生产环境卫生监督管理规定》等规章制度，并采取了一系列管理措施，加强对海洋鱼、虾类产卵场、索饵场、越冬场、洄游通道、养殖场的生态环境保护。国家和沿海地区建立了多级渔业环境保护机构，全国建立了15个省级以上海洋渔业环境监测站，重点渔业水域建立了一批海洋生物保护区。1995年，中国政府有关部门制定《海洋自然保护区管理办法》，贯彻养护为主、适度开发、持续发展的方针，对各类海洋自然保护区划分为核心区、缓冲区和试验区，加强海洋自然保护区的建设和管理。目前，已建立各种类型海洋自然保护区59个，总面积1.29万平方公里，其中包括海湾保护区、海岛保护区、河口海岸保护区、珊瑚礁保护区、红树林保护区、海岸泻湖保护区、海洋自然历史遗址保护区、海草床保护区和湿地保护区等。

    To protect the ecological environment of fishing grounds, the Water Quality Standards of Fishing Grounds have been drawn up by the Chinese government and the Regulations on the Supervision and Control of the Environmental Sanitation of Shellfish-Raising Areas and other regulations have been drawn up by departments concerned. In addition, a sequence of measures have been taken to further strengthen the eco-environmental protection of spawning grounds of saltwater fish and shrimps, feeding grounds, wintering grounds, migration channels and aquatic farms. A multilevel setup for the protection of the fisheries environment has been established by the state and coastal region authorities, including 15 monitoring stations at and above the provincial level around the country and a number of marine life protected areas in major fishing grounds. In 1995 the department concerned worked out the Procedures for the Administration of Marine Reserves, based on the guiding principle of ``conservation first, appropriate exploitation and sustainable development,'' and divided each marine nature reserve into core, buffer and experimental zones, in order to improve the building and management of the marine nature reserves. At present 59 marine protected areas, covering gulfs, islands, estuaries, coasts, coral reefs, mangrove swamps, coastal lagoons, marine natural history sites, seaweed beds and wetlands, have been built, covering a total area of 12,900 sq km.

    中国是世界上海洋灾害最严重的国家之一。影响中国沿海的风暴潮、海浪、海冰、地震海啸、海岸侵蚀、台风和海雾，以及赤潮生物灾害等海洋灾害，在各类自然灾害总经济损失中约占10%。经过几十年的努力，中国已初步建成了由近海到远海、多部门合作的海洋环境及灾害观测网络和预报、警报系统，开展了主要海洋灾害分析、预警报和评估业务，建设了海上搜救中心和沿岸防灾准备应急系统，形成了海洋减灾体系。

    China is one of the countries which are most vulnerable to marine calamities. The economic losses suffered by the coastal areas from storms, tidal waves, ice floes, seaquakes, coastal erosion, typhoons, fog and red tides account for about 10 percent of the total of all natural disasters afflicting China. After making unremitting efforts for decades, China has installed a basic marine environment and disaster observation network and forecast-alarm system, covering both offshore areas and distant waters, with the cooperation of several departments. This network engages in analysis, forecast and grading of major marine calamities, and runs maritime rescue centers and coastal emergency stations. As a result, a marine disaster alleviation framework has been put in place.

    随着沿海地区经济的迅速发展、人口的逐步增加和海洋开发规模的不断扩大，中国海洋环境保护和减灾工作面临的形势依然严峻。为了保护和保全海洋环境，中国制定了《全国海洋环保“九五”（1996—2000年）计划和2010年长远规划》，继续贯彻预防为主、防治结合，谁污染谁治理，强化环境管理三大政策，并采取以下主要措施保护海洋环境：
    
    The rapid economic growth and steady population increase in the coastal areas, coupled with the constant expansion of marine exploitation, mean that China continues to face problems of marine environmental protection and disaster alleviation. To cope with this situation, China has adopted the Ninth Five-Year Plan (1996-2000) and Long-Term Program to the Year 2010 for National Marine Environmental Protection, which further advances the three major policies of "putting prevention first, combining prevention with control", "making the causer of pollution responsible for treating it" and "improving the control of the environment". The following are the principal measures China will take to protect the marine environment:

    加强污染源控制，制定入海河流全流域水质目标，建立重点海域排污总量控制制度，确定主要污染物排海指标，严格限制超过规定数量的排放；

    --Control of pollution sources will be enhanced by setting quality standards for the water in all parts of rivers which flow into the sea, establishing a system to control the total amount of pollutant discharge into the key sea areas, identifying the marine discharge indices of the main pollutants, and strictly restricting discharge above the initial amount;

    加强海洋污染调查、监测和管理，完善污染监测网，健全卫星、船舶、岸站立体监视和执法体系；

    The investigation, monitoring and control of marine pollution will be stepped up by improving the pollution monitoring network, strengthening surveillance by satellites, ships and offshore monitoring stations, and perfecting the law enforcement system;

    逐步建立排污收费制度，鼓励社会各方面发展海洋环保技术和产业；

    Fees will gradually be levied for pollutant discharge, and all walks of life will be encouraged to develop marine environmental protection technologies and industries;

    加强海洋监测和灾害预警系统建设，建设观测网、数据采集与通讯网、预警和服务网，以及资料质量控制系统，等等。

    The construction of the system of marine monitoring and disaster forecasting and alarm will be stepped up, complete with an observation network, a data collection and communication network, a forecast-alarm and service network and a data quality control system.

　　发展海洋科学技术和教育

　　 The Development of Oceanographic Science, Technology and Education

　　近年来，中国不断深化海洋资源和环境调查、勘探，积极寻找新的可开发资源，研究新的开发、保护技术和方法，大力培养海洋开发与保护的科技人才队伍，普及海洋知识，努力提高全民族的海洋意识。

　　In recent years China has made further efforts to promote the investigation and exploration of marine resources and the marine environment, search actively for new exploitable resources, study new techniques and methods of marine resources exploitation and protection, train technical personnel in marine development and protection, and spread oceanographic knowledge among the general public in order to rouse the whole nation to protect the marine environment.

　　中国现有涉海科研机构109个、科研人员13000多人，已经形成了一支学科比较齐全的海洋科技队伍，在海洋调查和科学考察、海洋基础科学研究、海洋资源开发与保护、海洋监测技术以及海洋技术装备制造等方面取得了许多成绩。

　　On the basis of a multidisciplinary oceanographic research setup, which consists of 109 research institutes and 13,000-some research personnel, China has many achievements to its credit in oceanographic survey and research, studies in basic oceanographic science, development and protection of ocean resources, marine monitoring technologies and manufacturing of oceanographic technical equipment.

　　新中国成立以来，在海洋调查和海洋科学考察方面做了大量的工作。其调查范围从近海逐步扩展到大洋，调查方式从海面观测逐步发展到航空航天遥感、海面观测、水下探查。早在1958年至1960年，中国就组织了全国海洋综合普查；1980年至1986年，进行了全国海岸带和海涂资源综合调查，并开展了海岸带综合开发利用试验；1988年至1995年，又进行了全国海岛资源综合调查和海岛综合开发试验等等。

　　Since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949 a large amount of work has been done in the field of oceanographic surveys and research, which started in offshore areas with surface observation of the sea and later expanded to deep-sea regions by means of aerospace remote sensing and underwater detection, as well as surface observation. As early as in the period 1958-1960 a national comprehensive survey of China's offshore waters was made; later, from 1980 to 1986, a comprehensive survey of coastal zones and shoals resources was conducted nationwide, along with the launching of a number of pilot projects on the comprehensive development and utilization of coastal zones; and from 1988 to 1995 a general investigation of the country's island resources and an experiment on their comprehensive development were carried out.

    1983年，中国加入了《南极条约》，并从1984年开始进行南极及其周围海域调查，到1997年共进行了14次科学考察，先后建立了长城、中山南极科学考察站，为人类和平利用南极作出了积极贡献。1996年中国又加入了国际北极科学委员会，积极参与《北极在全球变化中的作用》等相关的国际合作项目。

    China signed the Antarctic Treaty in 1983 and began to make surveys of the Antarctic and the surrounding sea areas in 1984. By 1997 the country had completed 14 programs of scientific investigation in this region, using the Great Wall and Zhongshan survey stations as bases. Thus, China has made positive contributions to the world's peaceful exploitation of the Antarctic. In 1996 China joined the International Scientific Committee on North Pole Research, and has taken an active part in international cooperation projects in the Arctic, such as "The Role of the Polar Region in Global Change".

　　中国海洋科学研究以近海陆架区海洋学为主，已经形成了具有区域特征的多学科的海洋科学体系。国家有关部门制定了海洋科学发展战略和支持海洋科学发展的规划和计划。近年来，中国在物理海洋学、生物海洋学、海洋地质学、海洋化学等学科取得了显著进展，为海洋渔业发展、海洋油气资源开发、海洋环境保护和海洋防灾减灾等，提供了科学指导和依据。

　　With more attention paid to the study of the inshore shelf oceanography, China has established a multidisciplinary oceanographic research system with regional characteristics. Under the direction of the oceanographic development strategy and the support programs and plans for the development of oceanography drawn up by relevant state departments, marked progress has been made in recent years in physical oceanography, biological oceanography, marine geology and marine chemistry. These achievements have provided scientific directions and references for the promotion of offshore fishing and oil and gas exploitation, protection of the marine environment, and reduction and prevention of marine disasters.

　　中国积极发展海洋技术，已经形成了海洋环境技术、资源勘探开发技术、海洋通用工程技术三大类，包括20多个技术领域的海洋技术体系。目前，中国正在实施海洋高技术计划、海洋科技攻关计划和“科技兴海”计划。中国海洋高技术研究的重点是海洋监测技术、海洋探查资源开发技术、海洋生物技术。海洋科技攻关计划的重点是海岸带资源与环境可持续利用、海水淡化、海洋能利用和海水资源综合利用等与现代海洋开发直接相关的领域。1996年，中国政府有关部门联合制定了《“九五”（1996—2000年）和2010年全国科技兴海实施纲要》。据此，中国重点研究、开发和推广海洋增养殖技术、海洋生物资源深加工技术、海洋药物开发提取技术和海水化学资源利用技术。通过实施这个纲要，培育海洋科技企业，带动海洋产业生产力水平的提高，并力争使科技进步在海洋产业产值增长中的贡献率从30%提高到50%。

　　China makes vigorous efforts for the development of oceanographic technologies, building up an oceanographic technology system focusing mainly on the marine environment, exploration and exploitation of marine resources, and general marine engineering, and covering more than 20 technological fields. The country has now turned its attention to implementing a marine high-tech program, a program for tackling key problems in marine science and technology and one for marine development by reliance on science and technology. In its marine high-tech research China gives priority to technologies covering marine monitoring, marine exploration and resources exploitation, deep-sea exploration and marine biology. The program for tackling key problems in marine science and technology centers on fields directly related to modern marine development, such as sustainable exploitation of the resources and environment of coastal zones, desalinization of seawater, exploitation of marine energy and comprehensive utilization of seawater resources. In 1996 government departments concerned jointly formulated the National Plan for Implementing the "Program for Marine Development by Reliance on Science and Technology" in the Ninth Five-Year Period (1996-2000) and to the Year 2010, which focuses on research, development and dissemination of the technologies of marine reproduction and mariculture, fine processing of marine biological resources, exploration and extraction of marine pharmaceuticals and exploitation of chemical resources in seawater. Through implementation of this plan, China hopes to foster marine technology enterprises, improve the productivity of the marine industries, and make the technological progress factor rise from 30 percent to 50 percent in the output increase of the marine industries.

　　中国初步形成了海洋专业教育、海洋职业教育、公众海洋知识教育体系。目前共有设立海洋专业的高等院校37所，中等专业学校29所，不断为海洋事业输送大批科技与管理人才。海洋职业教育现有20多个技术岗位，仅近3年就培训8000多人。中国还常年利用新闻媒体对青少年进行海洋知识教育，并在沿海地区公众中开展合理开发利用海洋和保护海洋环境的常识教育。

　　China has basically evolved an oceanographic education system embracing professional education, vocational education and popular knowledge education. Oceanography as an area of study is taught in 37 institutions of higher learning and 29 secondary specialized schools in China, training large numbers of technical and managerial personnel. The vocational schools, offering courses in more than 20 oceanographic fields, have trained more than 8,000 people in the past three years. The mass media is frequently used in China to inform young people about oceanographic topics and educate the people living in coastal regions in the proper way to exploit marine resources and protect the marine environment.

　　经过几十年的发展，中国已经建成了以国家海洋信息中心为主的海洋资料信息服务系统，为海洋开发、海洋科研和环境保护提供了大量的信息服务。九十年代初，中国初步建成了国家有关部门、产业、研究机构、沿海地区共同参与的海洋信息交换网络。

　　In addition, a service system providing oceanographic data and information headed by the National Oceanographic Information Center has been established in China in the wake of the progress in the past dozens of years in this field; it provides comprehensive information services for ocean development, oceanographic research and marine environmental protection. Besides, in the early 1990s China built up a basic network jointly run by government departments concerned, enterprises, research institutes and coastal zones to promote oceanographic information exchanges.

　　为进一步发展海洋科学技术，推动海洋开发保护事业发展，中国政府制定了《中长期海洋科技发展纲要》、《海洋技术政策（蓝皮书）》和多项海洋科技发展规划。今后中国海洋科技发展的主要目标是：加强基础科学研究，解决海洋资源开发与环境保护的关键技术，提高海洋科技产业化水平，增强海洋开发和减灾、防灾的服务保障能力，提高对海洋环境的保护能力，缩小中国海洋科技水平与发达国家的差距。
    
　　To give a further boost to oceanographic technology, offshore development and marine environment protection, the Chinese government has worked out the Medium- and Long-Term Program for the Development of Oceanographic Science and Technology, the Oceanographic Technology Policy (Blue Paper) and a number of concrete development plans. The main tasks for oceanographic technology development in the future are: To strengthen research into basic oceanographic science; tackle the key technologies of marine resources exploitation and environmental protection; promote the application of oceanographic technologies to marine industries; improve marine resources development and service support for marine disaster prevention and reduction; improve marine environmental protection; and narrow the gap between China and the developed countries in oceanographic technology.

　　实施海洋综合管理

　　 The Implementation of Comprehensive Marine Management

　　1992年联合国环境与发展大会制定的《21世纪议程》提出，为了保证海洋的可持续利用和海洋事业的协调发展，沿海国家应建立海洋综合管理制度。这一倡议得到了包括中国在内的世界各国的普遍赞同。近年来，中国陆续建立并完善了国家和沿海地方海洋管理机构，形成了一定规模的海洋执法、管理监测和科学研究队伍，并制定了有关法规，开展各项海洋综合管理工作。

　　The UNCED Agenda 21, formulated at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in 1992, recommends that a comprehensive marine management system be established by countries with sea coasts to ensure sustainable utilization of the sea and coordinated development of the marine programs. This recommendation has received endorsement from all the countries in the world, including China. In recent years China has established and perfected state marine management organs as well as local organs in coastal regions, with a fairly large contingent of personnel engaged in marine law enforcement, management, monitoring and scientific research. Marine-related laws and regulations have been formulated and comprehensive management exercised.

　　中国加强了有关海洋领域的法制建设。中国全国人大通过了《中华人民共和国领海及毗连区法》、《中华人民共和国海洋环境保护法》、《中华人民共和国海上交通安全法》、《中华人民共和国渔业法》、《中华人民共和国矿产资源法》等海洋和涉海管理法律。国务院制定了《对外合作开采海洋石油资源条例》、《涉外海洋科学调查研究管理规定》、《铺设海底电缆管道管理规定》和《矿产资源勘查区块登记管理办法》等行政法规。这些法律、行政法规的内容与《联合国海洋法公约》的原则和有关规定是一致的；它们的制定和实施，既维护了国家主权和海洋权益，也促进了海洋资源的合理开发和海洋环境的有效保护，使中国的海洋综合管理初步走上法制化轨道。

　　China has also improved its legislation work concerning maritime matters. The National People's Congress has adopted the Law of the People's Republic of China on Its Territorial Seas and Adjacent Zones, Marine Environmental Protection Law of the People's Republic of China, Maritime Traffic Safety Law of the People's Republic of China, Fisheries Law of the People's Republic of China, Mineral Resources Law of the People's Republic of China and other related laws. The State Council has promulgated administrative regulations, encompassing the Regulations on the Exploitation of Offshore Petroleum Resources in Cooperation with Foreign Enterprises, Regulations on the Administration of Sino-Foreign Oceanographic Surveys, Regulations Governing the Laying of Submarine Cables and Pipelines, and Procedures for the Registration and Administration of Mineral Resources Survey Zones and Sectors. In content, these laws and administrative regulations are all consistent with the principles and relevant provisions contained in the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. The formulation and implementation of these laws, rules and regulations has, on the one hand, protected China's state sovereignty and marine rights and interests, and on the other, promoted the rational development of marine resources and the effective protection of the marine environment. Comprehensive management of China's marine areas is beginning to be contained within a legal framework.

　　为了科学、有效地进行海洋综合管理，1989年至1995年，国家有关部门和沿海地区编制了海洋功能区划，划出了3663个海洋功能区，包括开发利用区、治理保护区、自然保护区、特殊功能区、保留区等不同类型。1991年至1994年，国家有关部门和沿海地区编制了《全国海洋开发规划》，提出了海洋开发的战略目标、海洋产业结构和布局规划、海洋开发的区域规划，以及推动海洋开发的政策和措施。

　　Aiming at the scientific, effective and comprehensive management of marine areas, from 1989 to 1995 a total of 3,663 marine zones have been divided into different functional types by the relevant departments of the central and coastal area governments, encompassing development and utilization zones, control and protection zones, nature preservation zones, special function zones and reserved zones. From 1991 to 1994, these departments worked out the National Plan for Marine Development, in which the strategic objective of marine development, marine industrial production and distribution planning, and regional marine development planning were put forward, along with policies and measures to promote marine development.

　　近年来，中国积极开展海岸带综合管理试验，并取得了一些可喜成绩。1979年至1986年开展的“全国海岸带和海涂资源综合调查”，为开展海岸带综合管理积累了丰富的资料。自1994年起，中国政府与联合国开发计划署等机构合作，在厦门市建立海岸带综合管理示范区，取得了良好的效果，受到国际组织的好评，为中国和其他国家进行海岸带综合管理提供了经验。1997年，中国又与联合国开发计划署合作，在广西的防城市、广东的阳江市、海南的文昌市进行海岸带综合管理试验。
    
　　In recent years, China has achieved gratifying successes in comprehensive management experiments in the coastal zones. The Comprehensive Survey of China's Coastal Zones and Tideland Resources, which was carried out from 1979 to 1986, has accumulated abundant information for further efforts to be made in this field. Since 1994, construction of the Coastal Zone Model Comprehensive Management Area has been going on in Xiamen, with joint efforts by the Chinese government, the UN Development Program (UNDP) and other organizations. This project, which has achieved good results, has been praised by international organizations and provided experience for China and other countries to draw on for work in this regard. In 1997, China again cooperated with the UNDP in coastal zone comprehensive management experiments carried out in Fangcheng in the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Yangjiang in Guangdong Province and Wenchang in Hainan Province.

　　海洋综合管理的基本目的是保证海洋环境的健康和资源的可持续利用。为更好地做好这项工作，中国今后将在以下几个方面继续作出努力：

　　The basic objective of comprehensive marine management is to ensure a healthy marine environment and the sustainable utilization of marine resources. To make a greater success in this, China will make further efforts in this field, as follows:

　　完善海域使用管理法律制度；

It will perfect the legal system pertaining to the use and administration of sea areas;

　　建立和完善海洋综合管理信息系统，深化海洋资源环境调查和评价；

It will set up and perfect an information system to bolster comprehensive marine management, and expand the survey and appraisal of marine resources and the marine environment;

　　制定大比例尺海洋功能区划和综合性海洋开发保护规划；

It will formulate large-scale offshore functional divisions and plans for comprehensive marine development and protection;

　　建立综合决策机制，促进海洋事业协调发展；

It will set up an overall policy-making mechanism to promote the coordinated development of marine programs;

　　逐步完善多职能的海上监察执法队伍，形成空中、海面、岸站一体化海洋监察管理体系；

It will gradually perfect the multi-functional force of marine supervision and law enforcement personnel so as to form an integrated air, sea and onshore marine surveillance and management system;

　　广泛动员社会各界参与海洋资源和环境保护，增强广大民众热爱海洋、保护海洋的意识。

It will mobilize people from all walks of life to take part in the protection of marine resources and the marine environment and enhance their consciousness of the need to cherish and protect the ocean.

　　海洋事务的国际合作

　　 International Cooperation in Maritime Affairs

　　世界海洋是一个整体，研究、开发和保护海洋需要世界各国的共同努力。中国作为一个重要的发展中国家，深知自己在国际海洋事务方面担负的责任和义务。中国一贯主张和平利用海洋，合作开发和保护海洋，公平解决海洋争端。中国积极参与国际和地区海洋事务，推动海洋领域的合作与交流，认真履行自己承担的义务，为国际海洋事业的发展作出了应有的贡献。

　　As the world's oceans are an integral whole, the research, development and protection of the oceans require common efforts by all countries in the world. As an important developing country, China is well aware of its responsibilities and obligations concerning international maritime affairs. China has consistently insisted that the ocean be peacefully utilized, and jointly developed and protected, and disputes over maritime matters be settled in a fair manner. China has always taken an active part in international and regional maritime affairs, promoted cooperation and exchanges in this field, conscientiously fulfilled its duties and contributed its share to international development of the oceans.

　　中国支持并积极参与联合国系统开展的各种海洋事务，相继加入了联合国教科文组织政府间海洋学委员会、海洋研究科学委员会、海洋气象委员会、国际海事组织、联合国粮农组织、北太平洋海洋科学组织、太平洋科学技术大会等近20个国际组织，并与几十个国家在海洋事务方面开展了广泛的合作与交流。

　　China has always supported and actively participated in the various forms of marine-related activities promoted by the United Nations. China has joined nearly 20 international organizations, including the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO/IOC), Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR), Commission on Maritime Meteorology (CMM), International Maritime Organization (IMO), UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES), and Pacific Conference on Science and Technology (PACON). China has also engaged extensively in cooperation and exchanges in maritime affairs with scores of countries in the world.

　　中国参与了联合国第三次海洋法会议的历次会议和《联合国海洋法公约》的制定工作，并成为缔约国。中国还参加了联合国国际海底管理局、国际海洋法法庭筹备委员会会议，以及国际海底管理局的建立工作，并当选为国际海底管理局首届B类理事国。中国作为国际海底开发先驱投资者，投入了大量的资金、技术和人才，进行海底区域的勘探活动，不仅维护了中国在国际海底的权益，而且也是对人类开发利用大洋资源的贡献。中国学者还当选为首任国际海洋法法庭法官，在国际海洋事务中发挥了积极作用。

　　In addition, China has attended all the sessions of the Third Conference on the Law of the Sea of the United Nations (UNCLOS) and joined the formulation of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, thus becoming a contracting party to the latter. It has also attended the meetings of the preparatory committees on the International Seabed Authority (ISA) and the International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea. China took part in the establishment of the ISA and was elected as one of its first B-level council member states. As one of the first investors in international seabed development, China has put large amounts of capital, technology and qualified personnel into seabed exploration, which has not only safeguarded China's rights and interests in the international seabed but it also constitutes a contribution to man's endeavors to exploit marine resources. Moreover, a Chinese scientist was elected as one of the first judges of the International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea, playing a positive role in international marine affairs.

　　中国重视公海及其资源的保护管理工作。1993年至1995年，中国参与了联合国关于养护和管理跨界鱼类种群和高度洄游鱼类种群的协定的制定工作。先后与俄罗斯、美国、日本等国就开发和保护白令海渔业资源问题进行谈判，签署并核准了《中白令海狭鳕资源养护和管理公约》。为了保护公海渔业资源，中国参与了保护金枪鱼、鲸类，以及濒危物种的国际活动，加入了《养护大西洋金枪鱼国际公约》，并参加了《促进公海上渔船遵守国际养护和管理措施的协定》的制定工作。

　　China sets store by the protection and management of the high seas and their resources. From 1993 to 1995, China participated in the formulation of the Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the December 10, 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea Relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks. China has successively engaged in negotiations with Russia, the United States and Japan on the development and protection of the fisheries resources of the Bering Sea, and signed and ratified the Convention on the Conservation and Management of Pollack Resources in the Central Bering Sea. In order to protect fisheries resources on the high seas, China has taken part in international activities to protect tunas, whales and other endangered species of marine life, acceded to the International Convention for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, and participated in the formulation of the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas.

　　海洋是全球大通道，海洋交通运输领域的国际合作对于推动全球物资流通和经济发展具有重要意义。作为国际海事组织成员国，中国与51个国家签定了双边海运协定，积极开展海洋交通运输的国际合作与交流。在国际海事组织第16至20届大会上，中国连续当选为A类理事国。中国先后加入了国际海事组织制定的30多项公约，其中包括《1965年便利国际海上运输公约》、《1990年国际油污防备、反应和合作公约》、《1995年海员培训、发证和值班标准国际公约》、《1974年国际海上人命安全公约》、《1973/78年国际防止船舶造成污染公约》及其有关修正案、《1974年海上旅客及其行李运输雅典公约》、《统一船舶碰撞某些法律规定的国际公约》等国际公约。

　　Oceans being a main artery across the world, international cooperation in sea transportation is of great importance for promoting the interflow of commodities and economic development globalwide. As a member of the IMO China has signed bilateral maritime transportation agreements with 51 countries, making positive efforts to promote international cooperation and exchanges in maritime transportation. At the 16th to 20th sessions of the IMO, China was successively elected as an A-level council member state. China has also acceded to the 30-some conventions formulated by the IMO, such as the 1965 Convention on Facilitation of International Maritime Traffic, 1990 International Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Cooperation, International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers, 1978, As Amended, 1974 International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the protocol of 1978 relating thereto (MARPOL, or 73/78 Convention on Pollution Convention), Athens Convention Relating to the Carriage of Passengers and Their Luggage by Sea, 1974, and International Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules of Law with Respect to Collision Between Vessels.

　　中国参与了全球性海洋科研活动，包括全球海洋污染研究与监测、热带海洋与全球大气研究（TOGA）、世界大洋环流试验（WOCE）、全球联合海洋通量研究（JGOFS）、海岸带陆海相互作用研究（LOICE）、全球海洋生态系统动力学（GLOBEC）等，为推动全球海洋科技合作作出了积极努力。1985年至1990年，中国派出3艘船、300多名海洋科技人员参加了热带西太平洋海气耦合响应试验，获得大量科学资料，为了解西太平洋“暖池区”海气耦合作用对全球气候变化的影响，改进全球海洋和气候预报模式，研究厄尔尼诺等现象提供了重要依据。1990年，中国参加了北太平洋海洋科学组织（PICES），并于1992年参加了政府间海洋学委员会西太分委会。中国还参加了联合国亚太经社理事会海洋环境与海洋学研究工作组等地区性组织。中国参与了联合国教科文组织政府间海洋学委员会等国际组织倡导和发起的全球海洋观测计划（GOOS），并发起组织东北亚海洋观测系统。

　　China has also taken part in global oceanographic activities, including the GSMMP (global studies and monitoring of marine pollution), the TOGA (tropical ocean and global atmospheric project), the WOCE (world ocean circulation experiment), the JGOFS (joint global ocean flux study), the LOICE (land-ocean interaction in the coastal zone), and the GLOBEC (global ocean ecosystem dynamics), making positive efforts to promote worldwide oceanographic cooperation. From 1985 to 1990, China sent three ships and more than 300 scientific workers to conduct the coupled ocean and atmospheric response experiment in the tropical Western Pacific (COARE). Large amounts of scientific data were obtained, providing important materials for understanding the influence of that kind of response in the Western Pacific's "Warm Pool" on global climate changes, for improving global ocean and climate forecast modes and studying the El Nino Phenomena. China joined the North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) and the Regional Committee for the Western Pacific of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission in 1990 and 1992, respectively. China also joined the Working Group on Marine Resources Conservation of the Asia-Pacific Economic Conference and other regional organizations, as well as the Global Ocean Observation System (GOOS) initiated by the UNESCO/IOC and other international organizations, and helped to initiate and organize the Northeast Asia Ocean Observation System.

　　自八十年代以来，中国同美国、德国、法国、加拿大、西班牙、俄罗斯、朝鲜、韩国、日本等几十个国家广泛开展海洋科技合作，先后进行了长江口、黄河口、黑潮、海气相互作用、海南岛生物多样性等项合作调查和研究，取得了积极成果。仅中国和日本于1986年至1992年合作进行的黑潮调查，就进行了100多个航次的外业调查，交流科学家200多人次，为认识黑潮运动、变化规律和成因，以及西太平洋渔区资源变动等问题积累了大量资料。

　　Since the 1980s, China has engaged in extensive scientific cooperation in marine projects with dozens of countries, including the United States, Germany, France, Canada, Spain, Russia, the DPRK, the ROK and Japan, resulting in fruitful achievements in projects concerning the deltas of the Yangtze and Yellow rivers, Kuroshio, air-sea interaction, and the bio-diversity of Hainan Island. During the Kuroshio survey, jointly conducted by China and Japan from 1986 to 1992, more than 100 field operations were carried out, and meetings of over 20 scientists were arranged, which helped to accumulate a rich store of information for understanding the movement of Kuroshio, its regular pattern of changes and its origin, as well as the resources variations in the fishing grounds of the Western Pacific.

　　依据平等互利原则，中国积极开展地区性海洋渔业合作。在1975年中、日渔业协定的框架下，中、日两国每年都协商安排渔业资源的开发和保护工作。1997年中、日两国又签定了新的渔业协定，为中、日之间长期开展渔业合作奠定了基础。中国还与韩国、菲律宾等其他周边国家进行渔业谈判，讨论周边海域渔业资源开发和保护问题。

　　China has made strenuous efforts to foster cooperation in regional marine fisheries on the principles of equality and mutual benefit. Under the Agreement of Fisheries Between the Government of the People's Republic of China and the Government of Japan in 1975, China and Japan arranged for the development and protection of their fisheries resources every year through negotiations. In 1997, China and Japan signed a new agreement on fisheries, laying the foundation for long-term cooperation between the two countries in this regard. China has held talks with the ROK, the Philippines and other neighboring countries on the development and protection of fishery resources in the surrounding sea areas.

　　中国还承担了帮助发展中国家培训海洋专业和综合管理人才的国际义务，并多次举办海洋方面的国际会议。1987年首次在中国北京举办了国际海洋学院海洋管理培训班。1994年10月，国际海洋学院中国中心在中国设立，到目前为止，已先后举办了3次培训班，为19个发展中国家培训了海洋专业和海洋管理人才50多人次。1996年在中国举办了第24届世界海洋和平大会，发表了北京宣言，取得了积极成果。

　　China is also committed to helping developing countries train people for marine development and comprehensive management work, and has hosted many international maritime conferences. In 1987, the training course on ocean management of the International Ocean Institute was offered for the first time in Beijing. In October 1994, the China Center of the International Ocean Institute was set up. So far, it has held three training seminars for over 50 people from 19 developing countries, majoring in marine development. In 1996, the Pacem in Maribus XXIV Conference was held in China, at which positive results were attained and a Beijing Declaration was announced.

　　中国为发展海洋事业，开发和保护海洋作出了积极努力。与此同时，中国政府也清醒地认识到，由于中国是一个发展中国家，发展水平和经济力量有限，使得中国的海洋开发与保护同世界上一些发达国家相比，还存在着差距：中国的海洋科学技术水平还比较低，海洋开发技术装备比较落后，许多海洋开发领域尚处在粗放型阶段，特别是近年来随着沿海地区人口的不断增加和经济的快速发展，给海洋环境的保护和海洋资源的合理开发带来了很大压力。中国已经把合理开发利用与保护海洋资源和环境列入跨世纪的国民经济和社会发展总体规划之中，把海洋事业可持续发展作为一项基本战略。随着社会生产力的不断发展，综合国力的进一步增强，以及国民海洋意识的逐步提高，中国的海洋事业必将得到更大的发展。中国将一如既往地与世界各国和有关国际组织一道，为促进人类开发和保护海洋事业走上可持续发展道路而作出应有的贡献。

　　While making great efforts for the development and protection of the ocean, China is clearly aware of the fact that, as a developing country with inadequate level of development and limited economic strength, China has lagged behind some of the developed countries in this regard. The marine scientific and technological level in China is relatively low, the equipment used in marine development is backward and many development areas are still in rough shape. Especially, the increasing population and rapid economic growth in the coastal areas in recent years have put great pressure on the marine environmental protection and hampered the rational development of marine resources. China has put the issue of rational utilization and protection of marine resources and the marine environment into the overall, cross-century plans for national economic and social development, and has adopted the sustainable development of marine programs as a basic strategy. With the continuing growth of the forces of social production, the further building-up of comprehensive national strength and the gradual awakening of the people's consciousness of the importance of marine protection, China's marine programs will definitely enjoy still greater development. Together with other countries and international organizations concerned, China will, as always, play its part in bringing mankind's work for marine development and protection onto the road of sustainable development.

中国的少数民族政策及其实践
National Minorities Policy and  Its Practice in China

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council of the Peoples Republic of China 

一九九九年九月·北京
June 2000, Beijing


目   录
Contents

统一的多民族国家
A United Multi-Ethnic Country 

坚持民族平等团结
 Adherence to Equality and Unity Among Ethnic Groups

实行民族区域自治制度
 Regional Autonomy for Ethnic Minorities

促进各民族共同发展
 Promoting the Common Development of All Ethnic Groups

保护和发展少数民族文化
 Preservation and Development of the Cultures of Ethnic Minorities


　　统一的多民族国家

　　A United Multi-Ethnic Country  

　　中华人民共和国是全国各族人民共同缔造的统一的多民族国家。迄今为止，通过识别并经中央政府确认的民族有56个，即汉、蒙古、回、藏、维吾尔、苗、彝、壮、布依、朝鲜、满、侗、瑶、白、土家、哈尼、哈萨克、傣、黎、傈僳、佤、畲、高山、拉祜、水、东乡、纳西、景颇、柯尔克孜、土、达斡尔、仫佬、羌、布朗、撒拉、毛南、仡佬、锡伯、阿昌、普米、塔吉克、怒、乌孜别克、俄罗斯、鄂温克、德昂、保安、裕固、京、塔塔尔、独龙、鄂伦春、赫哲、门巴、珞巴、基诺等民族。在中国，由于汉族以外的55个民族相对汉族人口较少，习惯上被称为“少数民族”。
      
　　The People's Republic of China is a united multi-ethnic state founded jointly by the people of all its ethnic groups. So far, there are 56 ethnic groups identified and confirmed by the Central Government, namely, the Han, Mongolian, Hui, Tibetan, Uygur, Miao, Yi, Zhuang, Bouyei, Korean, Manchu, Dong, Yao, Bai, Tujia, Hani, Kazak, Dai, Li, Lisu, Va, She, Gaoshan, Lahu, Shui, Dongxiang, Naxi, Jingpo, Kirgiz, Tu, Daur, Mulam, Qiang, Blang, Salar, Maonan, Gelo, Xibe, Achang, Pumi, Tajik, Nu, Ozbek, Russian, Ewenki, Deang, Bonan, Yugur, Jing, Tatar, Drung, Oroqen, Hezhen, Moinba, Lhoba and Jino. As the majority of the population belongs to the Han ethnic group, China's other 55 ethnic groups are customarily referred to as the national minorities. 

　　1990年中国第四次人口普查的数据表明，在全国总人口中，汉族人口占91．96％，少数民族人口占8．04％①。1995年全国1％人口抽样调查表明，在中国12亿多人口中，少数民族人口为10846万人，占全国总人口的8．98％，比1990年提高了0．94个百分点。

　　According to the fourth national census conducted in 1990, of the country's total population 91.96 percent belong to the Han ethnic group, and 8.04 percent belong to minority ethnic groups1. A sample survey conducted among one percent of the total population in 1995 showed that 108.46 million people belonged to minority ethnic groups, accounting for 8.98 percent of the country's total population of more than 1.2 billion, a 0.94 percentage point increase over the figure in 1990. 

　　中国各民族分布的特点是：大杂居、小聚居、相互交错居住。汉族地区有少数民族聚居，少数民族地区有汉族居住。这种分布格局是长期历史发展过程中各民族间相互交往、流动而形成的。中国少数民族人口虽少，但分布很广。全国各省、自治区、直辖市都有少数民族居住，绝大部分县级单位都有两个以上的民族居住。目前，中国的少数民族主要分布在内蒙古、新疆、宁夏、广西、西藏、云南、贵州、青海、四川、甘肃、辽宁、吉林、湖南、湖北、海南、台湾等省、自治区②。

　　China's ethnic groups live together over vast areas while some live in individual concentrated communities in small areas. In some cases minority peoples can be found living in concentrated communities in areas inhabited mainly by the Han people, while in other cases the situation is just the other way round. This distribution pattern has taken shape throughout China's long history of development as ethnic groups migrated and mingled. The national minorities, though small in numbers, are scattered over vast areas. Minority peoples live in every province, autonomous region and municipality directly under the Central Government, and in most county-level units two or more ethnic groups live together. Now minority peoples are mainly concentrated in provinces and autonomous regions such as in Inner Mongolia, Xinjiang, Ningxia, Guangxi, Tibet, Yunnan, Guizhou, Qinghai, Sichuan, Gansu, Liaoning, Jilin, Hunan, Hubei, Hainan and Taiwan2. 
 
　　中国自古以来就是一个统一的多民族国家。公元前221年，中国建立了第一个统一的多民族的中央集权国家秦朝。今天中国的广西、云南等少数民族较为集中的地方都在秦朝统一政权管辖下，并设有郡县加以统治。汉朝（公元前206年—公元220年）继承秦制，中央集权的封建国家更加强大。汉朝在西域（汉朝以后对今中国甘肃敦煌以西地区的总称）置都护府，增设17郡统辖四周各民族，形成了包括今天新疆各族人民先民在内的疆域宽广的国家。在汉朝与周边的少数民族进行频繁的各种交往活动中，汉朝之名也遂被其他民族用来称呼华夏民族，形成了世界上人数最多的民族——汉族。经过秦朝的开创、汉朝的巩固与发展，中国统一的多民族国家从此奠定。

　　China has been a united multi-ethnic country since ancient times.In 221 B.C., the first united, multi-ethnic, centralized state--the QinDynasty--was founded in China. Today's Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region and Yunnan Province, where minority peoples are concentrated, were prefectures and counties under the jurisdiction of the united Qin regime. During the Han Dynasty (206 B.C.-220 A.D.), the centralized feudal state became even more powerful by inheriting the Qin system. The Han Dynasty set up a Frontier Command Headquarters in the Western Regions (a general term for today's territory west of Dunhuang, Gansu Province, since the Han Dynasty) and added 17 prefectures governing the people of all ethnic groups there. In this way, a state with a vast territory embracing the ancestors of the various peoples living in Xinjiang today emerged. In the course of the frequent communication between the Han Dynasty and the surrounding minority peoples, the people of the Chinese nation were called the Han by other ethnic groups, and the most populous ethnic group in the world, the Han, emerged. China as a united multi-ethnic country was created by the Qin Dynasty and consolidated and developed by the Han Dynasty.

　　汉朝以后，中国历代中央政权发展和巩固了秦汉“大一统”的多民族国家的格局。各个朝代的中央政权既有汉族建立的，也有少数民族建立的。公元十三世纪，蒙古族建立起统一的多民族的大元（1206—1368年）帝国。元朝在全国实行行省制度，在南方部分少数民族聚居的府、州设置土官（以少数民族首领充任并世袭的地方行政长官），在西藏设立主管军政事务的宣慰使司都元帅府，西藏从此成为中国领土不可分割的一部分，还设立澎湖巡检司管理澎湖列岛和台湾。元朝的民族成分包括现今中国绝大多数民族。公元十七世纪，满族崛起，建立中国历史上最后一个封建王朝——清朝（1644—1911年）。清朝在西域设立伊犁将军并建立新疆行省，在西藏设立驻藏大臣，并确立了由中央政府册封达赖、班禅两大活佛的历史定制，在西南地区实行“改土归流”（少数民族地方行政长官由中央政府委派）等一系列政策。

　　The central governments of all dynasties following the Han developed and consolidated the united multi-ethnic entity. The central governments of the past dynasties were established not only by the Han people but also by minority peoples. In the 13th century, the Mongolians established the united multi-ethnic Great Yuan Empire (1206-1368). The Yuan Dynasty practiced a system of xingsheng (province, or branch secretariat, a paramount administrative agency in a provincial area) across the country and appointed aboriginal officials or tu guan (hereditary posts of local administrators filled by chiefs of ethnic minorities) in the prefectures and subprefectures of the southern regions where minority peoples lived in concentrated communities. It established the Pacification Commissioner's Commandery in charge of military and administrative affairs in Tibet, whereby Tibet has became thenceforth an inalienable part of Chinese territory, as well as the Penghu Police Office for the administration of the Penghu Islands and Taiwan. Ethnically, the Yuan Empire comprised most of modern China's ethnic groups. The rise of the Manchu in the 17th century culminated in the founding of the last feudal dynasty in Chinese history, the Qing Dynasty (1644-1911). The Qing Dynasty set up the Ili Generalship and Xinjiang Province in the Western Regions, appointed resident officials in Tibet and established the historical convention of conferring honorific titles on the two Living Buddhas Dalai and Panchen lamas by the Central Government. In addition, the Qing Dynasty carried out a series of policies, including a system of local administrators in minority areas appointed by the Central Government, in southwestern China. 

　　中国历史上虽然出现过短暂的割据局面和局部分裂，但统一始终是中国历史发展的主流③。

　　Although there were short-term separations and local divisions in Chinese history, unity has always been the mainstream in the development of Chinese history3. 

　　在长期的大统一过程中，经济、文化交往把中国各民族紧密地联系在一起，从而形成了相互依存、相互促进、共同发展的关系，创造和发展了中华文明。中国各民族相互依存的政治、经济、文化联系，使其在长期的历史发展中有着共同的命运和共同的利益，产生了强固的亲和力、凝聚力。

　　During the long process of unification, economic and cultural exchanges brought the people of all ethnic groups in China closely together, giving shape to a relationship of interdependence, mutual promotion and mutual development among them and contributing to the creation and development of the Chinese civilization. Due to their interdependent political, economic and cultural connections, all ethnic groups in China have shared common destiny and interests in their long historical development, creating a strong force of affinity and cohesion. 

　　中国各民族团结合作，共同捍卫了统一的多民族国家。特别是近代以来，中国曾沦为半殖民地半封建社会，中华民族遭受帝国主义侵略、压迫和欺凌，陷入被压迫民族的境地，为捍卫国家的统一和中华民族的尊严，各民族团结奋斗，共御外侮，与侵略者和民族分裂主义者进行了不屈不挠的斗争。十九世纪，新疆各族人民协同清军消灭了阿古柏反动势力，挫败了英、俄侵略者企图分裂中国的阴谋。十九世纪末和二十世纪初，西藏军民在隆吐山、江孜两次战役中，重创英国侵略者。在中国人民反抗日本帝国主义侵略的八年抗战（1937—1945年）中，各族人民同仇敌忾，浴血奋战，其中的回民支队、内蒙古抗日游击队等许多以少数民族为主的抗日力量为抗战的胜利所作的贡献为世人熟知。针对极少数民族分裂主义者在帝国主义侵略势力的扶持下，策划和制造“西藏独立”、新疆的“东突厥斯坦”、东北的伪“满洲国”等违背历史潮流和中华民族意志的分裂国家行径，各民族人民进行了坚决的斗争，维护了国家的统一。


　　The unity and cooperation among the various ethnic groups have helped to safeguard China as a united multi-ethnic state. In particular in modern times, when China became a semi-colonial and semi-feudal society and the Chinese nation suffered from imperialist invasion, oppression and humiliation and was reduced to the status of an oppressed nation, in order to safeguard the unity of the state and the dignity of the Chinese nation, all the ethnic groups united and fought unyieldingly together against foreign invaders and ethnic separatists. In the 19th century, the people of all the ethnic groups in Xinjiang together with the Qing troops wiped out Yakoob Beg's reactionary forces and defeated the British and Russian invaders' plot to split China. At the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century, Tibetan people and troops dealt a heavy blow on the British invaders at the Mount Lungthur and Gyangze battles. During the eight-year war of resistance against Japanese imperialist aggression (1937-1945), the Chinese people of all ethnic groups shared bitter hatred of the enemy and fought dauntlessly and unflinchingly. It is well known that many anti-Japanese forces with ethnic minorities as the mainstay, such as the Hui People's Detachment and the Inner Mongolia Anti-Japanese Guerrilla Contingent made great contributions to China's victory in the War of Resistance. The people of all ethnic groups fought unswervingly and succeeded in safeguarding national unity against acts aimed at splitting the country, which went counter to the historical trend and the will of the Chinese nation, including plots for the "independence of Tibet", for the setting up of an "Eastern Turkestan" in Xinjiang and the carving out of a puppet state of "Manchoukuo" in Northeast China, hatched or engineered by a few ethnic separatists with the support of imperialist invaders.
 
　　在中华人民共和国成立前，中国历代政府虽都有一套关于民族事务的政策和制度，但无论是汉族还是少数民族建立的中央政权，民族间无平等可言。1949年中华人民共和国的建立，开辟了中国各民族平等、团结、互助的新时代。在中华人民共和国统一的民族大家庭内，各民族在一切权利完全平等的基础上，自愿地联合和团结起来，相互促进，共同发展，致力于建设富强、民主、文明的新中国。

　　Before the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the central governments of the various periods in China each had a sequence of policies and systems of its own concerning ethnic affairs, but under all of them, whether set up by the Han people or an ethnic minority, there was no equality to speak of among ethnic groups. The founding of the People's Republic of China opened up a new era in which all ethnic groups in China enjoy equality, unity and mutual aid. In the big, united family of ethnic groups in the People's Republic of China, on the basis of equality of all rights, the people of all ethnic groups unite of their own accord for mutual promotion and common development and dedicate to the building of a strong, prosperous, democratic and civilized New China.

　　坚持民族平等团结

　　 Adherence to Equality and Unity Among Ethnic Groups  
    
    在中国，民族平等是指：各民族不论人口多少，经济社会发展程度高低，风俗习惯和宗教信仰异同，都是中华民族的一部分，具有同等的地位，在国家和社会生活的一切方面，依法享有相同的权利，履行相同的义务，反对一切形式的民族压迫和民族歧视。而民族团结是指：各民族在社会生活和交往中的和睦、友好和互助、联合的关系。民族团结要求在反对民族压迫和民族歧视的基础上，维护和促进各民族之间和民族内部的团结，各民族人民齐心协力，共同促进国家的发展繁荣，反对民族分裂，维护国家统一。中国政府历来认为，民族平等是民族团结的前提和基础，没有民族平等，就不会实现民族团结；民族团结则是民族平等的必然结果，是促进各民族真正平等的保障。
      
　　In China, equality among ethnic groups means that, regardless of their population size, their level of economic and social development, the difference of their folkways, customs and religious beliefs, every ethnic group is a part of the Chinese nation, having equal status, enjoying the same rights and performing the same duties in every aspect of political and social life according to law, and ethnic oppression or discrimination of any form is firmly opposed. Unity among ethnic groups means a relationship of harmony, friendship, mutual assistance and alliance among ethnic groups in social life and mutual contacts. To achieve such unity, the various ethnic groups are required to, on the basis of opposition to ethnic oppression and discrimination, safeguard and promote unity among themselves and within every particular ethnic group and the people of all ethnic groups should, jointly and with one heart and one mind, promote the development and prosperity of the nation, oppose ethnic splits and safeguard the unification of the country. The Chinese government has always maintained that equality among ethnic groups is the precondition and basis for unity among ethnic groups, that the latter cannot be achieved without the former, that the latter is the logical outcome of the former and a guarantee for promoting ethnic equality in its true sense.

　　民族平等和民族团结作为解决民族问题的基本原则和根本政策，在中国的宪法和有关法律中得到明确规定。

　　Equality and unity among ethnic groups as the basic principle and policy for resolving ethnic problems have been clearly defined in the Constitution and relevant laws.

　　《中华人民共和国宪法》规定：“中华人民共和国各民族一律平等。国家保障各少数民族的合法权利和利益，维护和发展各民族的平等、团结、互助关系。禁止对任何民族的歧视和压迫”。中国各民族公民广泛地享有宪法和法律赋予公民的各项平等权利。诸如：各民族公民不分民族、种族、宗教信仰，都同样地享有选举权和被选举权；各民族公民的人身自由和人格尊严不受侵犯；各民族公民都有宗教信仰自由的权利；各民族公民都有接受教育的权利；各民族公民都有使用和发展本民族语言文字的权利；各民族公民都有言论、出版、集会、结社、游行、示威的自由；各民族公民都有从事科学研究、文学艺术创作和其他文化活动的权利；各民族公民都有劳动、休息和丧失劳动能力时从国家和社会获得物质帮助的权利；各民族公民都有对国家机关和国家工作人员提出批评和建议的权利；各民族公民都有保持或改革自己风俗习惯的自由等等④。

　　The Constitution of the People's Republic of China stipulates: ``All ethnic groups in the People's Republic of China are equal. The state protects the lawful rights and interests of the ethnic minorities and upholds and develops a relationship of equality, unity and mutual assistance among all of China's ethnic groups. Discrimination against and oppression of any ethnic group are prohibited.'' Citizens of all ethnic groups in China enjoy all equal rights accorded to citizens by the Constitution and law. For instance, they have the rights to vote and stand for election, regardless of ethnic status, race and religious belief; their personal freedom and dignity are inviolable; they enjoy freedom of religious belief; they have the right to receive education; they have the right to use and develop their own spoken and written languages; they enjoy freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly, of association, of procession and of demonstration; they have the right to engage in scientific research, literary and artistic creation and other cultural pursuits; they have the right to work and rest, and the right to material assistance from the state and society when they are disabled; they have the right to criticize and make suggestions regarding any state organ or functionary; and they have the freedom to preserve or change their own folkways and customs4.
 
　　中国政府采取了特殊的政策和措施，努力使宪法和法律规定的各民族一律平等的权利在社会生活和政府行为中得到有效落实和保障，形成了各民族平等相待、团结和睦、友好互助的良好社会环境。

　　The Chinese government has adopted special policies and measures to effectively realize and guarantee the right to equality among all ethnic groups, which is prescribed by the Constitution and law, in social life and government activities. As a result, a favorable social environment has been created for ethnic groups to treat each other on an equal footing and to develop a relationship of unity, harmony, friendship and mutual assistance among them. 

　　保护少数民族人身自由

　　Protection of the Personal Freedom of Ethnic Minorities 

　　中华人民共和国成立前，中国少数民族地区经济社会发展很不平衡，有的处于封建农奴制社会，有的处于奴隶制社会，有的还处于原始社会末期。这些地区的少数民族群众大都附属于封建领主、大贵族、寺庙或奴隶主，可以被任意买卖或当作礼物赠送，没有人身自由⑤。在西藏，形成于十七世纪并沿用了300多年的法律——《十三法典》、《十六法典》，将人严格划分为三等九级：“上等人”是大贵族、大活佛和高级官员，“中等人”为一般僧俗官员、下级军官和上等人的管家等，“下等人”是农奴和奴隶。“法典”规定：“上等上级人”的命价按尸量黄金计，“下等下级人”的命价仅为一根草绳，而“下等人”占西藏总人口的95％以上⑥。不改革少数民族地区落后的社会政治制度，宪法和法律规定的少数民族的各项平等权利就无法实现。

　　Before the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the economic and social development of the areas inhabited by ethnic minorities was unbalanced; some areas were in society under the serf system, some under the slave system and some even in the later period of the primitive system. The mass of the minority people in these areas were vassals of big feudal lords, nobles, temples or slave owners; they had no personal freedom and could be sold or bought or given as gifts by their owners at will5. In Tibet the Thirteen-Point Law and Sixteen-Point Law formulated in the 17th century and used for more than 300 years, divided the people strictly into three classes and nine grades: the people of the upper class were big nobles, Grand Living Buddhas and high officials, the people of the intermediate class were ordinary clerical and secular officials, junior officers and stewards of upper class people, and the people of the lower class were serfs and slaves. According to these Laws the value of the life of a top-grade person of the upper class was measured by the weight of his body in gold, while the life of a lowest-grade person of the lower class was as cheap as a straw rope. However, the people of the lower class exceeded 95 percent of the total population of Tibet6. It is obvious that without the reform of the backward social and political system in minority areas the various equal rights of minority peoples stipulated in the Constitution and the law could not be realized.

　　中华人民共和国成立后，根据大多数少数民族地区人民的意愿，中国政府采取不同方法先后在少数民族地区逐步实行民主改革，并在五十年代末完成。这场改革废除了领主、贵族、头人等特权者的一切特权，消灭了人剥削人、人压迫人的旧制度，使千百万少数民族群众翻身解放，获得人身自由，成为国家和自己命运的主人。1959年在西藏进行的民主改革，彻底废除了长达700多年的政教合一、贵族僧侣专权的封建农奴制度，昔日百万农奴和奴隶获得了人身自由，成了新社会的主人。

　　After the founding of the People's Republic of China, the Chinese government adopted different measures to institute democratic reform successively in the minority areas at the will of the minority of the people in these areas, and completed the reform in the late 1950s. This reform abolished all the privileges of the privileged few--feudal lords, nobles and tribal chiefs--and the old system of exploitation and oppression of man by man. As a result, tens of thousands of the minority people won emancipation and personal freedom and became masters of their homelands and their own destinies. The democratic reform which took place in Tibet in 1959 eradicated the feudal serf system marked by the combination of government and religion and the dictatorship of nobles and monks, thus tens of thousands of serfs and slaves under the old system got their personal freedom and became masters of the new society. 

　　各民族平等参与国家事务的管理

　　All Ethnic Groups Participate in State Affairs Administration on an Equal Footing 

　　在中国，各少数民族与汉族都以平等的地位参与国家大事和各级地方事务的管理，而且少数民族参与行使管理国家的权利受到特殊保障。在中国的最高权力机关全国人民代表大会的选举中，充分反映了对少数民族权利的尊重。中国各少数民族都依据《中华人民共和国全国人民代表大会和地方各级人民代表大会选举法》的规定，选出代表本民族的全国人民代表大会代表，人口特别少的民族，即使达不到规定的产生一名代表的人数，至少也有一名代表。从1954年第一届全国人民代表大会至今，历届全国人民代表大会中，少数民族代表在全国人民代表大会代表中所占名额的比例，均高于同期在全国人口中所占的比例。1998年选出的第九届全国人民代表大会代表中，少数民族代表共有428人，占代表总数2979人的14．37％，比同期少数民族人口占全国总人口的比例约高出5个百分点。

　　In China, the minority and Han peoples participate as equals in the management of affairs of the state and local governments at various levels, and the rights of the minority ethnic groups to take part in the management of state affairs are especially guaranteed. Elections to the National People's Congress(NPC)--the highest organ of state power--fully reflect respect for the rights of ethnic minorities. In accordance with the provisions of the Electoral Law of the National People's Congress and Local People's Congresses of the People's Republic of China, the minority peoples shall have their own deputies to sit in the NPC, and the ethnic groups whose population is less than that prescribed for electing one deputy are permitted to elect one deputy. From the first session of the First NPC, held in 1954, to the present day, the proportions of deputies of ethnic minorities among the total number of deputies in every NPC have been higher than the proportions of their populations in the nation's total population in the corresponding periods. Of 2,979 deputies elected in 1998 to the Ninth NPC, 428 deputies were from ethnic minority, accounting for 14.37 percent of the total, which was about five percentage points higher than the proportion of their total population in the nation's total population at that time.

　　在地方各级人民代表大会中，少数民族聚居的地方，每一聚居的少数民族都有代表参加当地的人民代表大会。散居的少数民族也参加选举代表本民族的当地人民代表大会的代表，而且每一代表所代表的人口数可以少于当地人民代表大会每一代表所代表的人口数。

　　In areas where ethnic minorities live in concentrated communities, each of them may have its own deputy or deputies sit in the local people's congresses. Ethnic minorities living in scattered groups may also elect their own deputies to the local people's congresses and the number of people represented by each of their deputies may be less than the number of people represented by each of the other deputies to such congresses. 

　　国家大力培养使用少数民族干部，全国现有少数民族干部270多万人。在中央和地方国家权力机关、行政机关、审判机关和检察机关都有相当数量的少数民族人员，参加国家和地方事务的管理。目前，在中国全国人民代表大会常务委员会副委员长中，少数民族占21％，在全国政协副主席中，少数民族占9．6％；在国务院领导成员中，有一人为少数民族；在国务院的组成部门中，有两位部长是少数民族；155个民族自治地方政府的主席、州长、县长或旗长都由少数民族人员担任。

　　The state has made great efforts to train ethnic minority cadres and enlist their service. To date, there are well over 2,700,000 minority cadres throughout the country. The ethnic minorities also have a fairly large appropriate number of personnel working in the central and local state organs, administrative organs, judicial organs and procuratorial organs, taking part in the management of national and local affairs. Today, among the vice-chairpersons of the Standing Committee of the NPC, those of ethnic minority origin account for 21 percent; among the vice-chairpersons of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), those of ethnic minority origin account for 9.6 percent; of the leading members of the State Council, one is of ethnic minority origin; among the leaders of the component departments of the State Council, two ministers are from ethnic minority groups; and the heads of the governments of the 155 ethnic autonomous regions, prefectures and counties (or banners) are all from ethnic minority groups.

　　确认少数民族成分

　　Identification of Ethnic Minorities 

在中华人民共和国成立以前，中国究竟有多少少数民族，并不清楚。
Before the founding of the People's Republic of China, it had never been made clear how many ethnic minorities there were in China.
中华人民共和国成立后，为了全面贯彻实行民族平等政策，从1953年起，国家组织了大规模的民族识别考察工作，辨别民族成分和民族名称。
After the founding of the People's Republic of China, to implement the policy of equality among ethnic groups in an all-round way the state has organized large-scale investigations since 1953 to identify the ethnic groups. 
识别考察从中国的历史和现实情况出发，按照科学认定与本民族意愿相结合的原则，只要具有构成单一民族条件的，不管其社会发展水平如何，不论其居住区域大小和人口多少，都认定为一个民族。
Proceeding from conditions both past and present and in accordance with the principle of combination of scientific identification and the wishes of the given ethnic group, every group which accords with the conditions for an ethnic group is identified as a single ethnic group, regardless of its level of social development and the sizes of its inhabited area and population.
经过认真的调查研究，到1954年，中国政府确认了38个民族；
By 1954, the Chinese government had identified 38 ethnic groups in all, after careful investigation and study.
到1964年，中国政府又确认了15个民族。
By 1964, the Chinese government had identified another 15 ethnic groups. 
加上1965年确认的珞巴族、1979年确认的基诺族，全国55个少数民族都被正式确认并公布。
With the addition of the Lhoba ethnic group, identified in 1965, and the Jino ethnic group, identified in 1979, there are 55 ethnic minority groups which have been formally recognized and made known to the public.
新中国的民族识别工作使许多不被旧中国的统治者承认的少数民族获得了应有的承认，并与中国其他民族一样享有平等权利。
Now, in New China many ethnic minority groups which had not been recognized by the rulers of old China have been recognized as they should, and they all enjoy equal rights with other ethnic groups in China.

　　反对任何形式的民族歧视和压迫

　　Opposing Ethnic Discrimination or Oppression of Any Form

在旧中国，在民族歧视和民族压迫制度下，许多少数民族没有平等的、准确的称谓，
Under the system of ethnic discrimination and oppression in old China, many ethnic minorities did not have proper names or names given in the spirit of equality.
有些少数民族地区的地名也带有民族歧视和压迫的含义。
The names of certain minority-inhabited areas even carried the implications of ethnic discrimination or oppression.
中华人民共和国成立以后，中央人民政府采取措施，于1951年发布了《关于处理带有歧视或侮辱少数民族性质的称谓、地名、碑碣、匾联的指示》，废除了带有侮辱性的称谓、地名等。
In 1951 the Central People's Government promulgated the Directive on Dealing with the Appellations, Place Names, Monuments, Tablets and Inscriptions Bearing Contents Discriminating Against or Insulting Ethnic Minorities, and such names, appellations, etc. were resolutely abolished.
有的少数民族称谓虽然没有侮辱性的含义，也根据少数民族自己的意愿进行了更改，如僮族的“僮”改为“壮”等。
Some ethnic appellations not implying insults were also changed at the wish of the given ethnic group, for instance, the appellation of the Tong ethnic group was changed to Zhuang.

　　在中国，任何煽动民族仇视和歧视，破坏民族平等团结的言行都是违法的。少数民族如遭受歧视、压迫或侮辱，有向司法机关控告的权利，司法机关对此种控告必须负责予以处理。

　　In China any words or acts aimed at inciting hostility and discrimination against any ethnic group and sabotaging equality and unity among peoples are regarded as violating the law. Any ethnic minority subjected to discrimination, oppression or insult, has the right to complain to judicial institutions at any level, which have the duty of handling the complaint.

　　中国加入了《消除一切形式种族歧视国际公约》、《禁止并惩治种族隔离罪行国际公约》、《防止和惩治灭绝种族罪行公约》等国际公约，并认真履行国际公约的义务，同国际社会一起，为在世界各国实行民族平等，反对种族隔离、民族压迫和民族歧视进行不懈的努力。

　　China has joined international conventions such as The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, and Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, and has conscientiously performed the duties prescribed in these conventions and made unremitting efforts together with the international community to realize ethnic equality and oppose racial segregation and ethnic oppression and discrimination in all countries of the world. 

　　维护和促进各民族大团结

　　Upholding and Promoting the Unity of All Ethnic Groups

　　为保障民族平等，加强民族团结，中国宪法规定：要反对大民族主义，主要是大汉族主义，也要反对地方民族主义。同时，国家还在全体公民中广泛开展各民族大团结的宣传和教育。在文艺作品、影视作品、新闻报道、学术研究中都大力倡导民族平等、民族团结，反对民族压迫和民族歧视，特别是反对大民族主义。为防止和杜绝意识形态领域的大民族主义和不平等现象的出现，中国政府有关部门、机构专门就严禁在新闻出版和文艺作品中出现损害民族团结内容等事项作出了规定。

　　To safeguard equality among ethnic groups and enhance their unity, the Constitution contains provisions on the need to combat big-ethnic group chauvinism, mainly Han chauvinism, and local ethnic chauvinism. The state also educates all citizens in the unity of all ethnic groups. In literary and art works, films and televisions programs, news reports and academic research, China vigorously advocates the equality and unity of ethnic groups, and opposes ethnic oppression and discrimination, and especially big-ethnic group chauvinism. Besides, to prevent and eliminate big-ethnic-group chauvinism and inequality in the ideological field, the relevant departments and organs of the Chinese government have worked out special provisions to strictly prohibit contents damaging ethnic unity in the media, publications, and literary and art works.

　　自八十年代以来，中国政府及有关部门多次举行民族团结进步表彰活动，对维护各民族平等权利、促进各民族和睦相处和共同进步繁荣的单位和个人给予表彰和奖励。1988年，中国政府在全国广泛深入开展民族团结进步活动的基础上，召开了第一次全国民族团结进步表彰大会，有565个先进集体、601名先进个人受到表彰。1994年，中国政府又召开了第二次全国民族团结进步表彰大会，1200多个模范单位和个人受到表彰。1999年，中国政府还将在北京召开第三次全国民族团结进步表彰大会。通过开展民族团结进步表彰活动，激励先进，弘扬正气，使民族团结成为强大的社会舆论和良好的社会风尚，不仅推动了民族团结进步事业的发展，而且对维护少数民族地区和整个国家的稳定也产生了深远影响。

　　Since the 1980s, the Chinese government and the relevant departments have held meetings to commend ethnic unity and progress, at which those units and individuals who uphold the equal rights of ethnic groups and promote harmonious coexistence and common progress and prosperity of ethnic groups are praised and encouraged. Following the launching of a nationwide in-depth movement for the unity and progress of ethnic groups, in 1988 the Chinese government held the first national meeting to commend and give awards to units and individuals distinguished in this regard, at which the commendation involved 565 advanced collectives and 601 advanced individuals. At the second national meeting, held in 1994, a total of 1,200 model units and individuals were cited, and the third national meeting is scheduled to be held in Beijing in 1999. The holding of this kind of meetings has gone a long way toward inspiring the advanced, encouraging healthy trends and making ethnic unity become a powerful part of public opinion and a fine moral conduct in society. It has not only pushed forward the cause for unity and progress among ethnic groups, but it has also exerted a far-reaching influence on the maintenance of stability in ethnic minority areas and the nation at large.

　　尊重和保护少数民族宗教信仰自由

　　Respecting and Protecting the Freedom of Religious Belief of Ethnic Minorities

　　中国是一个有着多种宗教的国家，主要有佛教、道教、伊斯兰教、天主教、基督教等。中国少数民族群众大多有宗教信仰，有的民族群众性地信仰某种宗教，如藏族群众信仰藏传佛教。中国政府根据《中华人民共和国宪法》关于公民有宗教信仰自由的规定，制定了具体政策，尊重和保护少数民族的宗教信仰自由，保障少数民族公民一切正常的宗教活动。在中国，不论是信仰藏传佛教的藏、蒙古、土、裕固、门巴等民族的群众，还是信仰伊斯兰教的回、维吾尔、哈萨克、东乡、撒拉、保安、柯尔克孜、塔吉克、乌孜别克、塔塔尔等民族的群众，以及部分信仰基督教的苗、瑶等民族的群众，他们正常的宗教活动都受到法律的保护。目前，中国有清真寺3万余座。在新疆有清真寺2．3万座。在西藏，有藏传佛教各类宗教活动场所1700多处。

　　China is home to many religions, mainly Buddhism, Taoism, Islam and Christianity. Most people belonging to ethnic minorities in China hold religious beliefs. In the case of certain ethnic groups religions are followed on a mass scale, for instance the Tibetans have Tibetan Buddhism as their traditional religion. In accordance with the Constitution's provisions on freedom of religious belief of citizens, the Chinese government has formulated specific policies to ensure respect for and safeguard freedom of religious belief for ethnic minorities and guarantee all normal religious activities of ethnic minorities citizens. In China, all normal religious activities, such as those of Tibetan Buddhism, which is followed by the Tibetan, Mongolian, Tu, Yugur and Moinba ethnic groups, Islam, followed by the Hui, Uygur, Kazak, Dongxiang, Salar, Bonan, Kirgiz, Tajik, Ozbek and Tatar ethnic groups, and Christianity, followed by some people of the Miao and Yao ethnic groups, are all protected by law. To date, there are more than 30,000 mosques in China, of which 23,000 are in the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region. In Tibet there are over 1,700 places for Tibetan-Buddhism activities. 

　　使用和发展少数民族语言文字

　　Use and Development of Spoken and Written Languages of Ethnic Minorities 

　　中国各民族都有使用和发展自己语言文字的自由和权利。国家在五十年代组织人员对少数民族语言文字情况进行了全面调查，建立专门的民族语文工作机构和研究机构，培养民族语文专门人才，帮助少数民族创制、改进或改革文字，推进少数民族语文在各个领域中的运用。

　　All ethnic groups in China have the freedom and right to use and develop their own spoken and written languages. In the 1950s, China organized specialists to make investigations of the spoken and written languages of ethnic minorities, and established special organizations involved in work connected with the spoken and written languages of ethnic minorities as well as institutions to research these languages, to train specialists in these languages, help minority people create, improve or reform their written languages, and promote the use of spoken and written languages of ethnic minorities in every field.

　　目前，中国55个少数民族中，除回族和满族通用汉语文外，其余53个民族都有自己的民族语言。有文字的民族有21个，共使用27种文字，其中壮、布依、苗、纳西、傈僳、哈尼、佤、侗、景颇（载佤文系）、土等十多个民族使用的13种文字是由政府帮助创制或改进的。

　　Now, all the 55 national minorities, except the Hui and Manchu, who use the Chinese language, have their own languages: among them 21 use 27 languages, and more than ten ethnic goups, including the Zhuang, Bouyei, Miao, Naxi, Lisu, Hani, Va, Dong, Jingpo (Zaiva language family) and Tu, use 13 languages which have been created or improved with the help of the government. 

　　在中国，无论在司法、行政、教育等领域，还是在国家政治和社会生活中，少数民族语言文字都得到广泛使用。在国家政治生活中，全国人民代表大会、中国人民政治协商会议召开的重要会议和全国或地区性重大活动，都提供蒙古、藏、维吾尔、哈萨克、朝鲜、彝、壮等民族语言文字的文件或语言翻译。民族自治地方的自治机关在执行职务的时候，都使用当地通用的一种或几种文字。在教育领域，各民族自治地方的自治机关根据国家的教育方针，依照法律规定，决定本地方的教育规划和各级各类学校的教学用语。少数民族为主的学校及其他教育机构，使用本民族或者当地通用的语言文字进行教学。在新闻、出版、广播、影视等领域，目前中国用17种少数民族文字出版近百种报纸，用11种少数民族文字出版73种杂志。中央人民广播电台和地方台用16种少数民族语言进行广播，地、州、县电台或广播站使用当地语言广播的达20多种。用少数民族语言摄制的故事片达3410部（集）、译制各类影片达10430部（集）。到1998年，全国36家民族类出版社用23种民族文字出版各类图书4100多种，印数达5300多万册。

　　The spoken and written languages of national minorities are widely used in judicial, administrative and educational fields, as well as in political activities and social life. In the political activities of the state, such as important meetings held by the NPC and the CPPCC, and national and local important activities, documents in Mongolian, Tibetan, Uygur, Kazak, Korean, Yi, Zhuang and other ethnic minorities, and language interpretation to or from these languages are provided. The organs of self-government in ethnic autonomous areas all use one or more languages of their areas when they perform their duties. In the educational field the organs of self-government, in accordance with the educational principles of the state and the law, work out their local educational programs and decide on the languages to be used in teaching in the local schools. In schools with minority students as the main body and other educational institutions the languages of the ethnic groups concerned or languages commonly used in the locality are used in teaching. China publishes about 100 newspapers in 17 minority languages and 73 periodicals in 11 minority languages. The Central People's Broadcasting Station and local broadcasting stations use 16 minority languages, and regional, prefectural and county broadcasting stations or rediffusion stations use more than 20. As many as 3,410 feature films have been produced and 10,430 films dubbed in minority languages. By 1998, 36 publishing houses specializing in publishing for national minorities had published more than 53 million copies of 4,100-odd titles of books in 23 minority languages. 

实行民族区域自治制度
Regional Autonomy for Ethnic Minorities 

　　在中国，民族区域自治制度是中国政府结合中国实际情况采取的一项基本政策，也是中国的一项重要政治制度。中国的民族区域自治是在国家的统一领导下，各少数民族聚居的地方实行区域自治，设立自治机关，行使自治权，使少数民族人民当家作主，自己管理本自治地方的内部事务。
      
　　In China regional autonomy for ethnic minorities is a basic policy adopted by the Chinese government in line with the actual conditions of China, and also an important part of the political system of China. Regional autonomy for ethnic minorities means that under the unified leadership of the state regional autonomy is practiced in areas where people of ethnic minorities live in concentrated communities; in these areas organs of self-government are established for the exercise of autonomy and for people of ethnic minorities to become masters of their own areas and manage the internal affairs of their own regions.

　　中国的民族自治地方分为自治区、自治州、自治县（旗）三级。民族自治地方的建立有以下类型：（一）以一个少数民族聚居区为主建立的自治地方，如新疆维吾尔自治区等；（二）以两个少数民族聚居区联合建立的自治地方，如青海省海西蒙古族藏族自治州等；（三）以多个少数民族聚居区联合建立的自治地方，如广西龙胜各族自治县等；（四）在一个大的少数民族自治地方内，人口较少的少数民族聚居区建立自治地方，如广西壮族自治区的恭城瑶族自治县等；（五）一个民族在多处有聚居区的，建立多个自治地方，如宁夏回族自治区、甘肃省临夏回族自治州、河北省大厂回族自治县等。对于有些少数民族聚居地区，因地域太小、人口太少，不宜建立自治地方和设立自治机关的，中国政府通过在这些地区设立民族乡的办法，使这些地区的少数民族也能行使当家作主的权利。民族乡是对民族区域自治制度的一种补充。

　　Autonomous areas for ethnic minorities in China include autonomous regions, autonomous prefectures and autonomous counties (banners). 1) Autonomous areas are established where people of one ethnic minority live in concentrated communities, such as the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region; 2) autonomous areas are established where two ethnic minorities live in concentrated communities, such as the Haixi Mongolian-Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture in Qinghai Province; 3) autonomous areas are established where several ethnic minorities live in concentrated communities, such as the Longsheng Ethnic Minorities Autonomous County in the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region; 4) autonomous areas are established within a larger autonomous area where people of an ethnic minority with a smaller population live in concentrated communities, such as the Gongcheng Yao Autonomous County in the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region; 5) autonomous areas are established for people of one ethnic minority who live in concentrated communities in different places, such as the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, the Linxia Hui Autonomous Prefecture in Gansu Province and the Dachang Hui Autonomous County in Hebei Province. For places where ethnic minorities live in concentrated communities but where autonomous areas and organs of self-government are not fit to be established because the areas and populations of the ethnic minorities are too small, ethnic townships are established so that the minority peoples there can also exercise their rights as masters of their homelands. Ethnic townships are a supplement to the system of regional autonomy. 

　　截止到1998年底，中国共建立了155个民族自治地方，其中自治区5个、自治州30个、自治县（旗）120个，还有1256个民族乡。在全国55个少数民族中，有44个民族建立了自治地方。实行自治的少数民族人口占少数民族人口总数的75%，民族自治地方行政区域的面积占全国总面积的64%。自治地方的数量和布局，与中国的民族分布和构成基本上相适应⑦。

　　By the end of 1998, five autonomous regions, 30 autonomous prefectures and 120 autonomous counties (banners) had been established, as well as 1,256 ethnic townships. Among the 55 ethnic minorities, 44 have their own autonomous areas, with a population of 75 percent of the total of the ethnic minorities and an area of 64 percent of the area of the whole country. The number and distribution of the autonomous areas are basically the same as the distribution and composition of the ethnic groups nationwide7.

　　中国所以实行民族区域自治制度，主要基于以下三个因素：一是中国在历史上长期就是一个集中统一的国家，实行民族区域自治制度符合中国的国情和历史传统。二是长期以来中国的民族分布以大杂居、小聚居为主。从各民族的人口构成来看，汉族一直占全国人口的绝大多数，少数民族的人口占少数。中华人民共和国成立初期，少数民族总人口仅占全国总人口的6%。除西藏、新疆等个别地区外，大多数民族地区的少数民族人口比汉族都要少。少数民族人口虽然少，但分布区域很广，超过中国陆地面积的一半以上。长期的经济文化联系，形成了各民族只适宜于合作互助，而不适宜于分离的民族关系。三是自1840年鸦片战争以来，中国各民族都面临着反帝反封建、为民族解放而奋斗的共同任务和命运。在共御外敌、争取民族独立和解放的长期革命斗争中，中国各民族建立了休戚与共的亲密关系，形成了汉族离不开少数民族、少数民族离不开汉族、少数民族之间也相互离不开的政治认同。这就为建立一个统一的新中国，并在少数民族地区实行民族区域自治奠定了坚实的政治和社会基础。

　　The following are the three reasons for China to practice the system of regional autonomy for ethnic minorities: First, it conforms to the conditions and historical traditions of China, because China has been centralized and united country over a long period of time. Second, over a long period of time China's ethnic groups have lived together over vast areas while some live in individual concentrated communities in small areas. The Han population accounts for the majority of the total population of the country, while the populations of ethnic minorities are in the minority. In the early period of the People's Republic of China, ethnic minorities only accounted for six percent of China's total population. In most multi-ethnic group areas the population of the national minorities is less than that of the Han people except in Tibet, Xinjiang and a few other regions. The national minorities are distributed over large areas, in more than half of the total territory of China. Economic and cultural contacts over long periods have evolved among them a relationship in which cooperation and mutual assistance, rather than separation, is the best choice for them. Third, following the outbreak of the Opium War in 1840, all the ethnic groups of China were faced with the common task and destiny of struggling against imperialism and feudalism and striving for national liberation. In the long-term revolutionary struggle against foreign enemies and for national independence and liberation, the various ethnic groups have developed a close interrelationship characterized by the sharing of weal and woe, and the common political understanding that the Han people cannot go without the minority peoples nor can the minority peoples go without the Han people or one minority people can go without another minority people. So a solid political and social foundation for the establishment of a united New China and the practice of regional autonomy in minority areas was laid in that period. 

    民族区域自治是与中国的国家利益和各民族人民的根本利益相一致的。实行民族区域自治，保障了少数民族在政治上的平等地位和平等权利，极大地满足了各少数民族积极参与国家政治生活的愿望。根据民族区域自治的原则，一个民族可以在本民族聚居的地区内单独建立一个自治地方，也可以根据它分布的情况在全国其他地方建立不同行政单位的多个民族自治地方；实行民族区域自治，既保障了少数民族当家作主的自治权利，又维护了国家的统一；实行民族区域自治，有利于把国家的方针、政策和少数民族地区的具体实际结合起来，有利于把国家的发展和少数民族的发展结合起来，发挥各方面的优势。

　　Regional autonomy for ethnic minorities conforms with the national interests and the fundamental interests of the people of all ethnic groups in China. The practice of regional autonomy for ethnic minorities has ensured their equal footing and equal rights politically and satisfied the desire of all the ethnic minorities to take an active part in nation's political activities to a large extent. According to the principle of regional autonomy for ethnic minorities, an ethnic group may establish an autonomous area in a region where it lives in concentrated communities, or it may establish several autonomous areas at different administrative levels in other parts of the country in line with the distribution of the ethnic group. The practice of regional autonomy not only ensures the rights of the ethnic minorities to exercise autonomy as masters of their homelands, but also upholds the unification of the state. It enhances the combination of state policies and principles and the concrete conditions of the ethnic minority areas and the integrated development of the state and the ethnic minorities, the better for each to give free rein to its own advantages.

　　中国的民族区域自治制度有如下两个显著的特色：一是中国的民族区域自治，是在国家统一领导下的自治，各民族自治地方都是中国不可分离的部分，各民族自治地方的自治机关都是中央政府领导下的一级地方政权，都必须服从中央集中统一的领导。上级国家机关在制定各项政策和计划、进行国家经济文化建设时，必须充分考虑各民族地区的具体情况和需要，动员各方面的力量予以帮助和支持。二是中国的民族区域自治，不只是单纯的民族自治或地方自治，而是民族因素与区域因素的结合，是政治因素和经济因素的结合。在中国，实行民族区域自治，既要有利于国家统一、社会稳定和民族团结，又要有利于实行自治的民族的发展和进步，有利于国家的建设。

　　The system of regional autonomy in China has two distinguishing features. First, regional autonomy is under the unified leadership of the state, and the autonomous areas are inseparable parts of China. The organs of self-government of the autonomous areas are local governments under the leadership of the Central Government, and they must be subordinated to the centralized and unified leadership of the Central Government. The concrete conditions and requirements of the various minority areas must be taken into full consideration and assistance and support solicited from all quarters when policies and plans are formulated and economic and cultural construction is conducted by the organs of state at higher levels. Second, regional autonomy for ethnic minorities in China is not only ethnic autonomy or local autonomy, but is the integration of ethnic and regional factors and the combination of political and economic factors. The practice of regional autonomy in China should be beneficial to the unification of the country, social stability and the unity of all ethnic groups; it should also benefit the development and progress of the ethnic group that practices autonomy and assist in national construction.

　　中国民族区域自治制度的确立经历了长时间的探索和实践。1947年，在中国共产党领导下，中国建立第一个省级少数民族自治地方——内蒙古自治区。1949年9月29日第一届中国人民政治协商会议通过的具有临时宪法作用的《中国人民政治协商会议共同纲领》，将民族区域自治制度确定为国家的一项基本政策和重要政治制度之一。1952年8月8日颁布的《中华人民共和国民族区域自治实施纲要》，对民族区域自治制度的实施，作了全面规定。在1954年制定及以后修正颁布的《中华人民共和国宪法》中，都将民族区域自治作为国家的一项重要政治制度加以规定。1984年颁布的《中华人民共和国民族区域自治法》，对少数民族自治地方的政治、经济、文化等各方面的权利和义务作了系统的规定。中华人民共和国建立后相继成立了四个自治区：1955年10月，新疆维吾尔自治区成立；1958年3月，广西壮族自治区成立；1958年10月，宁夏回族自治区成立；1965年9月，西藏自治区成立。

　　The establishment of the system of regional autonomy for ethnic minorities has undergone long period of exploration and practice. Under the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party, the first provincial-level autonomous region--the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region-- was founded in 1947. The Common Program of the CPPCC, adopted at the first CPPCC session on September 29, 1949 and serving as the country's provisional constitution, defined regional autonomy for ethnic minorities as a basic policy and one of the important political systems of the state. The Program for the Implementation of Ethnic Regional Autonomy of the People's Republic of China, issued on August 8, 1952, embodied overall arrangements for the implementation of regional autonomy for national minorities. The Constitution of the People's Republic of China adopted in 1954 and later amended and promulgated defines such autonomy as an important political system of state. The Law of the People's Republic of China on Ethnic Regional Autonomy, promulgated in 1984, contains systematic provisions on the political, economic and cultural rights and duties of ethnic minority autonomous areas. After the founding of the People's Republic of China, four autonomous regions were established successively: the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, founded in October 1955; the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, founded in March 1958; the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, founded in October 1958; and the Tibet Autonomous Region, founded in September 1965. 

　　《中华人民共和国宪法》规定，民族自治地方的自治机关是自治区、自治州、自治县的人民代表大会和人民政府。民族自治地方的自治机关，其建立和组织均依据人民代表大会制度的基本原则，但又有别于一般地方国家机关。《中华人民共和国民族区域自治法》规定：民族自治地方的各民族都应有适当名额的代表参加各级人民代表大会；民族自治地方的人大常委会中应当有实行区域自治的民族的公民担任主任或副主任；自治区主席、自治州州长、自治县县长由实行区域自治的民族的公民担任，自治区、自治州、自治县人民政府的其他组成人员要尽量配备实行区域自治的民族和其他少数民族的人员。

　　The Constitution stipulates that the organs of self-government of autonomous areas are the people's congresses and people's governments of autonomous regions, autonomous prefectures and autonomous counties. The establishment and organization of organs of self-government of autonomous areas are based on the basic principles of the people's congress system, but these organs are different from ordinary local state organs. The Law on Ethnic Regional Autonomy stipulates that all ethnic groups in autonomous areas shall elect an appropriate number of deputies to take part in the people's congresses at various levels; among the chairman or vice-chairmen of the standing committee of the people's congress of an autonomous area there shall be one or more citizens of the ethnic group or groups exercising regional autonomy in the area concerned; the head of an autonomous region, autonomous prefecture or autonomous county shall be a citizen of the ethnic group exercising regional autonomy in the area concerned, and the other members of the people's governments of these regions, prefectures and counties shall include members of the ethnic group exercising regional autonomy as well as members of other ethnic minorities as far as possible. 

　　民族自治地方的自治机关在行使地方国家机关职权的同时，依据宪法和民族区域自治法的规定，还行使立法权，变通执行或者停止执行权，经济发展权，财政权，少数民族干部培养使用权，发展教育和民族文化权，语言文字使用和发展权，以及科技文化发展权等。

　　While exercising the functions and powers of a local organ of state, organs of self-government in autonomous areas at the same time exercise other functions and powers as stipulated by the Constitution and the Law on Ethnic Regional Autonomy. These include legislative power, the power to flexibly carry out, or halt the carrying out of, some decisions, the right to develop their economics and control the local finances, the power to train and employ cadres belonging to ethnic minorities, the power to develop education and ethnic culture, the power to develop and employ the local spoken and written languages, and the power to develop technological, scientific and cultural and undertakings. 

　　民族自治地方的人民代表大会有权依照当地政治、经济和文化的特点，制定自治条例和单行条例。截至1998年底，民族自治地方共制定自治条例126个，单行条例209个。

　　The people's congresses of the autonomous areas have the right to enact regulations on the exercise of autonomy and separate regulations in light of local political, economic and cultural characteristics. By the end of 1998, 126 regulations on the exercise of autonomy and 209 separate regulations had been enacted by the autonomous areas.

　　民族自治地方的自治机关对上级国家机关的决议、决定、命令和指示，有不适合民族自治地方实际情况的，可在报经上级机关批准后，变通执行或者停止执行。根据《中华人民共和国婚姻法》第三十六条的规定，中国五个民族自治区和一些自治州结合当地的具体情况，制定了执行《中华人民共和国婚姻法》的补充规定，将婚姻法中关于公民的法定婚龄“男不得早于22周岁，女不得早于20周岁”的规定，修改为“男不得早于20周岁，女不得早于18周岁”。

　　If resolutions, decisions, orders and instructions from the higher-level state organs are not suited to the actual conditions of the autonomous areas, the organs of self-government of these areas may be flexible in carrying them out or may decide not to carry them out after approval by the higher state organs. According to Article 36 of the Marriage Law of the People's Republic of China, supplementary regulations have been worked out for carrying out the Marriage Law by the five autonomous regions and some autonomous prefectures in line with their own actual conditions. They changed the legal marriage age from "not below 22" to "not below 20 for men" and from "not below 20" to "not below 18 for women". 

　　民族自治地方的自治机关在国家计划的指导下，自主地安排和管理地方性的经济建设事业，根据本地方的特点和需要，制定经济建设的方针、政策和计划。内蒙古自治区根据本地区的实际情况，制定并实施了一系列适合当地经济发展的政策和措施，使本地区经济得到了较快发展。1998年，全区国内生产总值达1192．02亿元，人均国内生产总值5067元，财政收入达131．2亿元，城乡居民人均收入分别达4353元和1981元，这几项指标分别比1997年增长9．6%、7．5%、17．9%、10．4%、11．3%⑧。

　　Organs of self-government of autonomous areas may independently arrange and manage local economic construction within the guidance of state planning, and formulate policies, principles and plans for their economic construction according to their local characteristics and requirements. Owing to the adoption of a series of policies and measures suitable for the concrete conditions of local economic development, the economy of the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region has seen rapid development. In 1998, its GDP had reached 119.202 billion yuan, with a per capita average GDP of 5,067 yuan, and its revenue was 13.12 billion yuan, with per capita average incomes of 4,353 yuan and 1,981 yuan in urban and rural areas, respectively--increases of 9.6 , 7.5, 17.9, 10.4 and 11.3 percent8. 

　　民族自治地方的自治机关根据国家建设的需要，采取各种措施从当地民族中大量培养各级干部、各种科学技术、经营管理等专业人才和技术工人，充分发挥他们的作用。到1998年，广西壮族自治区共有各类少数民族干部37．29万人，占全区干部总数的35％。全区12个民族自治县的政府主要领导都由实行区域自治的民族干部担任，62个民族乡的乡长也由建乡的少数民族公民担任；全区地（市）、县、乡各级党政领导干部中，少数民族干部分别达到26．92%、39．71%和48．03%；在省部级、地厅级和县处级后备干部中，少数民族所占的比例也分别达到46%、32%和35%。西藏自治区到1998年藏族干部在全区干部总数中占74．9%，在西藏区、地、县三级领导骨干中，藏族及其他少数民族干部已分别占78%、67%和62%，在科技干部队伍中，藏族及其他少数民族也占到60%以上。

　　The organs of self-government in the autonomous areas have trained a large number of minority cadres, technicians, management personnel and other specialized personnel and skilled workers in line with the needs of national construction and brought their roles in work into full play. There were 372,900 minority cadres in the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region in 1998, accounting for 35 percent of the total cadres in Guangxi. The chief leaders of the governments of the 12 autonomous counties of this region are from the ethnic minorities exercising regional autonomy and the heads of the region's 62 ethnic townships are also from the ethnic minorities that have established such townships. Minority Party and government leaders of prefectures (cities), counties and townships in this region account for 26.92 percent, 39.71 percent and 48.03 percent of the total Party and government leaders of this region, respectively. Among the reserve cadres at the provincial, prefectural and county levels, minority cadres account for 46 percent, 32 percent, and 35 percent, respectively. In 1998, Tibetan cadres accounted for 74.9 percent of the total in the Tibet Autonomous Region, and at the regional, prefectural and county levels Tibetan cadres and cadres from other local ethnic minorities accounted for 78 percent, 67 percent and 62 percent, respectively. At the same time, cadres from the Tibetan and other ethnic minorities account for more than 60 percent in the scientific and technological departments. 

　　民族自治地方的自治机关根据国家的教育方针，依照法律，决定本地方的教育规划，各级各类学校的设置、学制、办学形式、教学内容、教学用语和招生办法，自主地发展民族教育（见表一）。1949年以前，宁夏全区文盲率高达95%以上，没有高等教育；现在一个结构合理、各类教育事业互为补充、多层次办学协调发展的教育体系已经形成。截至1998年，宁夏全区有各级各类学校6100多所，在校生达130多万人，其中普通高等学校5所，在校生有1．1万多人，全区非文盲率达到89．5%。旧西藏没有一所现代意义的学校，文盲率高达95％；到1998年，全区已拥有各级各类学校4365所，适龄儿童入学率达到81．3%，文盲率减少了47个百分点。

　　Organs of self-government of autonomous areas may decide their own local education programs, including the establishment of schools, the length of study, the forms of school running, course contents, language of instruction and procedures of enrollment and develop independently their own type of education based on their ethnic minority characteristics and within the state education policies and relevant laws (see Table 1). Before 1949, the illiteracy rate was upwards of 95 percent in Ningxia, and there was not a single institution of higher learning. But today, a rational multi-level educational system embracing different types of school that complement each other for coordinated development is in place in the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region. By 1998, there were 6,100 different kinds of schools in Ningxia, with a total of 1.3 million students. Among them there were five institutions of higher learning, with 11,000 students. As a result, in this region 89.5 percent of the people are literate. In old Tibet, there were no schools in the modern sense, and the illiteracy rate was 95 percent. But by 1998, there were 4,365 schools of all levels in the Tibet Autonomous Region. About 81.3 percent of school-age children now attend school, and the illiteracy rate has been reduced by 47 percentage points.

　　素有“教育之乡”美誉的吉林省延边朝鲜族自治州，近50年来教育事业得到了长足发展。据统计，1998年全州小学学龄儿童入学率达到99．97%，升学率为99．98%；全州初中入学率达95．2%，毕业率为96．8%，基本普及了九年义务教育。全州高等教育、职业教育、成人教育逐步走上协调发展的轨道，大中专毕业生和中级以上知识分子占人口的比例超过了全国平均水平。

　　The Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture in Jilin Province has made considerable progress in its education in the past 50 years, proving itself worthy of its time-honored reputation as ``home of education.'' According to the latest statistics, 99.97 percent of school age children in this prefecture were in primary schools in 1998, 99.98 percent of them have entered secondary schools of all types and 95.2 percent of them have entered regular junior middle schools, with a graduation rate of 96.8 percent. Nine-year compulsory education is virtually universal in this prefecture. Higher education, vocational education and adult education have gradually got onto the track of coordinated development. The proportion of graduates from universities and secondary specialized schools and intellectuals of the intermediate rank and above in the population of Yanbian exceeds the average number in the country. 

　　民族自治地方的自治机关自主地决定本地区的医疗卫生事业发展规划，发展现代医药和民族传统医药，加强地方病防治和妇幼卫生保健，改善卫生条件，使少数民族的健康水平得到提高（见表二）。

　　Organs of self-government of autonomous areas make their own decisions concerning medical and health work. Modern medicine and traditional ethnic minority medicine are promoted, prevention and cure of endemic diseases and maternal and child care have been improved, with the result that the health standards of the ethnic minorities across the country have markedly improved ( see Table 2). 

　　内蒙古自治区成立后，仅用三年时间就遏制了鼠疫的流行。宁夏于1963年控制了人间鼠疫。1961年在全国包括少数民族地区消灭了天花。西藏人均寿命由1959年民主改革时的36岁，增加到目前的65岁，婴儿死亡率由四十年前的43%下降到1998年的3．7%。宁夏人均寿命由1949年前的只有30岁左右，增加到目前的69岁。

　　It took only three years for the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region after its founding to check the spread of the plague. The Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region controlled the spread of the plague in 1963. In 1961, smallpox was eliminated throughout the whole country, including minority areas. The life span of Tibetans has increased to 65 years from 36 in 1959, the year of the democratic reform started. The infant mortality rate shrank to 3.7 percent in 1998 from 43 percent 40 years previously in Tibet. The life span of the people of Ningxia has increased to 69 from 30 before 1949. 

　　促进各民族共同发展

　　Promoting the Common Development of All Ethnic Groups 
 
　　中华人民共和国成立前，农牧业是中国少数民族地区的主要产业，发展十分缓慢，一些地区仍停留在“刀耕火种”的原始农业生产方式，部分地区铁制农具尚未得到使用，水利设施更是缺少。1949年，少数民族地区平均粮食亩产只有75公斤，全国少数民族地区农业总产值仅31．2亿元。中华人民共和国成立前，少数民族地区几乎没有现代工业。1949年，全国少数民族地区工业总产值仅有5．4亿元。交通、邮电和通讯事业也处在十分落后的状态，运输主要靠兽驮人背，汽车和公路极少，不少地区一封书信要走上一个月甚至更长时间，许多人没有见过汽车和电话，西藏没有一公里公路。
      
　　Before the founding of the People's Republic of China, agriculture and animal husbandry, the main economies in China's minority areas, developed very slowly. Some areas still remained in the primitive ``slash-and-burn'' stage of agricultural production, and in some areas, iron farm tool were not in use. In addition, water conservancy facilities were inadequate. In 1949 the average per-hectare yield of grain in minority areas was only 1,125 kg, and the total agricultural output of those areas was only worth 3.12 billion yuan. Before the founding of the People's Republic of China, there were almost no modern industries in ethnic minority areas. In 1949, the total industrial output value of these areas was only 540 million yuan. Communications, posts and telecommunications were also very backward; goods were transported mainly by animals and people. There were very few automobiles or highways, and more often than not, it took one month or longer to deliver a letter. Many people had never seen an automobile or a telephone, and there was not a single road in Tibet.

　　中华人民共和国成立后，国家尽一切努力，促进各民族的共同发展与进步。国家根据民族地区的实际情况，制定和采取了一系列特殊的政策和措施，帮助、扶持民族地区发展经济，并动员和组织汉族发达地区支援民族地区。《中华人民共和国民族区域自治法》中，有十三条规定了上级国家机关帮助民族自治地方发展的义务。国家在制定国民经济和社会发展计划时，有计划、有意识地在少数民族地区安排一些重点工程，调整少数民族地区单一的经济结构，发展多种产业，提高综合经济实力。特别是随着近年来中国改革开放的不断深入发展，国家加大了对少数民族地区的投资力度，加快了少数民族地区对外开放的步伐，使少数民族地区的经济发展呈现新的活力。

　　Since the founding of the People's Republic of China, the state has spared no effort to promote the common development and progress of all ethnic groups. In accordance with the actual conditions in the ethnic minority areas, the state has worked out and adopted a series of policies and measures to assist these areas in developing their economies, and mobilize and organize the developed areas where Han people live to support them. In the Law of the People's Republic of China on Ethnic Regional Autonomy, 13 articles specify the duties of the state organs at higher levels to help the ethnic autonomous areas with their development. While working out the plan for the national economic and social development, the state arranged some important projects in the national minority areas in a planned and conscious way to readjust their single-product economic structure, develop diversified industries and improve the comprehensive economic strength of those areas. Especially along with the constant deepening of China's reform and opening to the outside world in recent years, the state has increased its investments in minority areas to speed up their pace of opening-up, thus making the minority areas show new vitality for economic development. 

    加强少数民族地区基础设施建设，促进基础产业发展

　　Strengthening the Construction of Infrastructure Facilities and Promoting the Development of Basic Industries in Minority Areas

　　从“一五”计划（1953—1957年）开始，国家即在内蒙古、新疆、宁夏等民族地区安排了一批重点建设项目，如内蒙古包头钢铁基地、宁夏的青铜峡水电站、新疆的石油勘探和内蒙古兴安岭林区的开发等。仅在五六十年代，国家就在少数民族地区建设了四川至西藏、青海至西藏、新疆至西藏等公路干线，建设了包头至兰州、兰州至西宁、兰州至乌鲁木齐、贵阳至昆明、成都至昆明、成都至贵阳、长沙至贵阳等通往西北、西南少数民族地区的主要铁路干线。国家先后在少数民族地区建设了一大批大中型工业企业，仅在五个民族自治区和云南、贵州、青海三省少数民族聚居地就建设了1400多家。

　　During the First Five-Year Plan period (1953-1957), the state started to construct a number of key projects in the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region and the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, such as the Baotou Iron and Steel Base in Inner Mongolia, the Qingtongxia Hydropower Station in Ningxia, petroleum exploration in Xinjiang and the development of the Hinggan Mountains Forest Area in Inner Mongolia. In the 1950s and 1960s, China completed the Sichuan-Tibet, Qinghai-Tibet, Xinjiang-Tibet and other main highways in minority areas, and built the Baotou-Lanzhou, Lanzhou-Xining, Lanzhou-Urumqi, Guiyang-Kunming, Chengdu-Kunming, Chengdu-Guiyang, and Changsha-Guiyang trunk railways leading to the minority areas in northwest and southwest China. In addition, a large number of large and medium-sized industrial enterprises were set up one after another in minority areas, and a total of more than 1,400 industrial enterprises were set up in the five autonomous regions and the places where ethnic minorities live in concentrated communities in Yunnan, Guizhou and Qinghai provinces. 

　　国家对少数民族地区的基础设施建设和基础产业发展十分关注，近年来优先在少数民族较为集中的中西部地区安排水利、电力、交通、环境保护和资源开发项目，并实行投资倾斜，引导外资更多地投向中西部地区。1998年，国家增加的财政投资用于中西部地区的占62%，中央财政用于中西部地区固定资产投资增长31．2%，高出东部地区14．9个百分点，创新中国成立以来最高水平。这些政策和措施有力地促进了少数民族地区的经济发展（见表三）。据统计，1998年少数民族自治地方铁路营业里程达1．73万公里，是1952年的4．6倍；公路通车里程达37．41万公里，是1952年的14．4倍；邮路及农村投递总长度113．54万公里，是1952年的8．6倍。

　　The state has shown great concern for infrastructure facilities construction and basic industries development in minority areas, giving priority to the arrangement of water conservancy, power, communications, environmental protection and natural resource development projects in central and western China where ethnic minorities are comparatively concentrated. A preferential policy on investment has been adopted so as to guide more foreign investments to those areas. In 1998, of the total increased financial investment by the state, 62 percent was used in central and western China, and the investment made by the central authorities in fixed assets in central and western China increased by 31.2 percent, or 14.9 percentage points higher than that in eastern China and the highest figure since the founding of New China. These policies and measures have greatly promoted the economic development of ethnic minority areas (see Table 3). According to statistics, in 1998 railway traffic mileage in these areas totaled 17,300 km, or 4.6 times the 1952 figure, and the highway traffic mileage, 374,100 km or 14.4 times the 1952 figure. The postal routes and total rural delivery distance came to 1.1354 million km, or 8.6 times the 1952 figure. 

　　近年来，在国家的大力帮助下，新疆陆续建成了乌鲁木齐石化总厂、独山子石化总厂乙烯工程等一批技术先进的现代化大中型工业项目和南疆铁路、塔城机场、吐鲁番—乌鲁木齐—大黄山高等级公路等一批大型交通设施。据统计，在1978年至1997年的20年间，新疆建成投产项目5万多个，其中大中型项目64个，形成固定资产1900多亿元。这些投资使新疆的水利、交通、邮电等基础设施环境有了很大改善。新疆现已成为全国第四大产油及加工区，是全国重要的棉、毛纺业基地和毛皮加工基地⑨。

　　In recent years, thanks to huge state assistance, Xinjiang has completed a number of modern, technologically advanced large and medium-sized industrial projects, such as the Urumqi General Petrochemicals Factory and the ethylene project of the Dushanzi General Petrochemicals Factory, as well as a number of large communications facilities, such as the Southern Xinjiang Railway, the Tacheng Airport and the high-grade Turpan-Urumqi-Dahuangshan Highway. According to statistics, during the 20 years from 1978 to 1997, Xinjiang completed and put into operation more than 50,000 projects, including 64 large and medium-sized ones, with fixed assets totaling 190 billion yuan. These investments have greatly improved Xinjiang's water conservancy, communications, posts and telecommunications and other infrastructure facilities. Xinjiang has become the fourth-biggest oil producing and processing area in China, as well as an important cotton and woolen textile base and a fur processing base9.

　　中央政府对西藏的基础设施建设和基础产业发展给予了特殊的支持。1984年，中央组织九省市的人力、物力，用一年多的时间，在西藏援助修建了包括能源、交通、建材、市政建设等43项工程，投资达4．8亿元。1994年，中央政府又决定由中央和全国其他省市无偿援助西藏建设62项工程，总投资超过40亿元，现已有60项竣工。1997年，国家投资20．14亿元的羊卓雍湖抽水蓄能电站竣工、发电。据统计，从五十年代到1998年，中央政府共向西藏投入400多亿元，并调动了大量物资进藏。中央政府和其他省市的援助，极大地改善了西藏的基础设施和基础工业建设，如今西藏已拥有电力、采矿、建材、森工、毛纺、印刷、食品等现代工业。

　　The Central Government has extended special support to the construction of infrastructure facilities and the development of basic industries in Tibet. In 1984, the Central Government organized manpower and material resources from nine provinces and municipalities to help Tibet build 43 projects in just over a year, covering energy, communications, construction materials and municipal works and involving a total investment of 480 million yuan. In 1994, the Central Government also decided that the central authorities and the provinces and municipalities throughout the country should help Tibet construct 62 projects without compensation, with the total investment exceeding four billion yuan. So far, 60 of them have been completed. In 1997 the Yamzho Yumco Water Pumping and Energy Storing Power Station, built with state investment totaling 2.014 billion yuan, was completed and began to generate electricity. According to statistics, from the 1950s to 1998, the Central Government invested more than 40 billion yuan in Tibet, and transported a great amount of materials to it. The aid offered by the Central Government and other provinces and municipalities has greatly improved the construction of infrastructure facilities and basic industries in Tibet. Now Tibet has power, mining, construction materials, forestry, woolen textile, printing, food and other modern industries. 

　　发展少数民族地区农牧业经济

　　Developing Agriculture and Animal Husbandry in Ethnic Minority Areas 

　　中华人民共和国成立后，从中央到地方的各级政府积极领导少数民族农牧民开展农田基本建设和草原基本建设，采取各种措施发展农村经济，提高农业生产水平。政府通过无偿发放农具、发放生产资金、减免农牧业税、发放无息或低息贷款等措施，扶持少数民族地区农村经济的发展，取得了显著成就（见表四）。1998年，少数民族自治地方农民人均纯收入达1633．11元，是1980年的21．5倍。   

　　Since the founding of the People's Republic of China, the governments at all levels, from the central to the local, have actively led ethnic minority farmers and herdsmen to start capital construction on farmland and grasslands, and have adopted various measures to develop the rural economy and improve the agricultural production level. Through various measures, such as providing free farm tools and production capital, reducing and exempting agricultural and animal husbandry taxes, and issuing interest-free or low-interest loans, the Chinese government has made remarkable achievements in supporting the rural economic development of the areas inhabited by minority peoples (see Table 4). In 1998, the net income per farmer in ethnic minority autonomous areas reached 1,633.11 yuan, or 21.5 times the 1980 figure. 

　　八十年代初，中央政府对西藏确定了“土地归户使用、自主经营”和“牲畜归户、私有私养、自主经营”的两个长期不变政策，并对农民实行“免征免税”的优惠政策，从而极大地调动了占西藏人口80%以上的农牧民的生产积极性，农业生产连年丰收。1998年西藏全区粮食总产量达85万吨，比1959年增长4．6倍。为进一步改善西藏农牧业生产条件，国家在九十年代投资20多亿元，综合开发治理雅鲁藏布江、拉萨河、年楚河“一江两河”流域的农业基础设施，整个项目计划修建40项工程，项目完成后，受益耕地约占西藏现有耕地面积的45．6%。在国家的支持下，宁夏1989年以来在河套灌区先后完成了第一、二期农业综合开发，开垦荒地4万公顷，改造中低产田10万多公顷，新增粮食生产能力近4亿公斤⑩。

　　In the early 1980s, the Central Government decided on two policies toward Tibet that would not be changed for a long time to come -- ``The land will be used by households, and will be managed by them on their own,'' and ``livestock will be owned, raised and managed by households on their own'' --and offered exemption from taxes to farmers, thus greatly rousing the enthusiasm for production of the farmers and herdsmen, who make up over 80 percent of the total population of Tibet, and resulting in bumper harvests in agricultural production year after year. In 1998, the total grain output of the Tibet Autonomous Region stood at 850,000 tons, or 5.6 times the 1959 figure. To further improve the conditions for agricultural and animal husbandry production, in the 1990s the state has invested more than two billion yuan to comprehensively develop and improve the agricultural infrastructure facilities in the valleys of the Yarlungzangbo, Lhasa and Nyangqu rivers. It is planned that 40 projects will be constructed. After the completion of these projects, 45.6 percent of the existing cultivated area in Tibet will benefit from them. Thanks to the support of the state, since 1989 the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region has completed the first and second phases of the comprehensive agricultural development in the Hetao Irrigated Area, reclaimed 40,000 ha of wasteland, and ameliorated more than 100,000 ha of medium- and low-yield fields, enabling an additional production capacity of nearly 400 million kg of grain10. 

　　为帮助民族乡的发展，1993年中国政府制定了《民族乡行政工作条例》，规定上级政府应在财政、金融、税收、基础设施建设等方面采取特殊政策和措施支持民族乡发展经济。在“八五”期间（1991—1995年），政府每年设立1亿元贴息贷款，用于扶持少数民族地区发展乡镇企业。

　　To accelerate the development of the townships, in 1993 the Chinese government formulated the Regulations on the Administrative Work of Ethnic Townships, specifying that the governments at higher levels should adopt special policies and measures concerning finance, banking, taxation, the construction of infrastructure facilities, and other fields to help ethnic townships to develop their economies. During the Eighth Five-Year Plan period (1991-1995), the Chinese government offered discount-interest loans totaling 100 million yuan every year to assist minority areas in developing township enterprises. 

　　加大少数民族地区改革开放力度

　　Increasing the Momentum of Reform and Opening-Up in Minority Areas

　　中国自七十年代末实行改革开放政策以来，少数民族地区同全国其他地区一样，按照建立社会主义市场经济体制的改革目标，实施了农村、国企、财税、金融、投资、外贸、流通、社会保障、住房等方面的一系列改革，经济体制和运行机制发生了根本性的变化，国民经济的市场化和社会化程度明显提高。同时，随着国家全方位、多层次、宽领域对外开放格局的形成，少数民族地区发挥各自的沿海、沿江、沿边特点，积极发展边贸和对外经济技术合作，对外开放进入新的阶段，在全国对外开放总体格局中的地位和作用也日益突出。

　　Since the adoption of the policy of reform and opening-up by China at the end of the 1970s, minority areas, like the other areas throughout the country, have undertaken, along the line of establishing a socialist market economy system, a series of reforms concerning rural areas, state-owned enterprises, taxes, finance, investment, foreign trade, circulation, social security, and housing. Fundamental changes have taken place in their economic systems and operational mechanisms; and the level of marketization and socialization of the local economies have been remarkably improved. Meanwhile, along with the formation of the state omni-directional, multi-level and wide-ranging opening pattern, ethnic minority areas have brought into full play their respective advantages of lying along the coasts, the rivers and the country's borders to actively develop border trade and foreign economic and technological cooperation; and their opening to the outside world has entered a new stage. Their status and role in the nation's overall opening pattern is also becoming daily more pronounced.

　　七十年代末以来，国家在保留对民族地区的财政补贴并设立发展基金等多项优惠政策的同时，鼓励少数民族地区从本地的实际出发，积极开展外引内联，发展边境贸易，支持少数民族地区通过积极稳妥的改革，推动社会经济结构的调整，增强自我发展能力。

　　Since the end of the 1970s, while adopting various preferential policies, such as extending financial subsidies to minority areas and establishing development funds, the state has encouraged minority areas to actively start the introduction of foreign investment and technology and domestic cooperation, and develop frontier trade according to local circumstances. It has supported minority areas in their efforts to promote the readjustment of their social and economic structures, and strengthen their self-development ability through active and stable reform measures.

　　1987年，国家确定，在边疆少数民族地区选择一些条件较好的地方，借鉴国际上设立内陆开发区和边境自由贸易区的做法，加快对外开放步伐。为活跃沿边地区的经济，富裕边民，促进与周边国家的经贸合作，1992年国家决定进一步开放内蒙古自治区的满洲里、二连浩特，吉林省的珲春，新疆维吾尔自治区的伊宁、博乐、塔城，广西壮族自治区的凭祥、东兴等少数民族较为集中的内陆边境城市。1993年，国家选择了呼伦贝尔盟、乌海市、延边朝鲜族自治州、黔东南苗族侗族自治州、临夏回族自治州、格尔木市、伊犁哈萨克自治州等七个民族地区作为改革开放的试点。

　　In 1987, the state defined that places with right conditions in frontier minority areas should be selected to learn the international experiences of setting up inland development zones and frontier free trade zones, to speed up the opening there. To enliven economy in frontier areas, bring prosperity to frontier residents and promote economic and trade cooperation with adjacent countries, the state decided, in 1992, further to open a number of inland border cities with large minority populations, including Manzhouli and Erlianhot of the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, Hunchun of Jilin Province, Yining, Bole and Tacheng of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, and Pingxiang and Dongxing of the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region. In 1993, the state selected seven ethnic localities--Hulun Buir League, Wuhai City, Yanbian Korea Autonomous Prefecture, Southeast Guizhou Miao-Dong Autonomous Prefecture, Linxia Hui Autonomous Prefecture, Golmud City, and Ili Kazak Autonomous Prefecture, as areas for pilot projects for reform and opening-up. 

　　八十年代后，广西壮族自治区的北海市被国家列为14个沿海开放城市之一，还有一市五县列为国家沿海经济开放区；乌鲁木齐市、南宁市、昆明市、呼和浩特市、银川市、西宁市、贵阳市等少数民族自治区首府和少数民族较多的省的省会城市被国家列为内陆开放城市；国家还先后批准了桂林市、南宁市、乌鲁木齐市、包头市四个民族地区大中城市建立高新技术产业开发区。

　　In the 1980s, Beihai City in the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region was listed as one of the country's 14 coastal open cities; another one city and five counties were named as national coastal economic open zones; Urumqi, Nanning, Kunming, Hohhot, Yinchuan, Xining, Guiyang and other capital cities of ethnic minority autonomous regions and provinces which have fairly large minority populations, were listed as inland open cities; the state also gave approval to Guilin, Nanning, Urumqi and Baotou cities, which are four large and medium-sized cities in minority areas, to establish new- and high-tech industrial development zones.

    目前，新疆已同世界上70多个国家和地区建立了稳定的经贸关系。1992年至1997年，新疆进出口贸易总额达69．9亿美元，年均增长21．1％。新疆六个开放城市和经济技术开发区、边境经济合作区各方面的建设和招商引资都取得重大成果。新疆已开通15个开放口岸，兰新铁路复线和第二座亚欧大陆桥的贯通，使一个现代化的西北国际大通道初步形成。

　　So far, Xinjiang has established stable economic and trade relations with more than 70 countries and regions worldwide. From 1992 to 1997, Xinjiang's total import and export volume reached 6.99 billion US dollars-worth, with an average annual growth rate of 21.1 percent. The six open cities, the economic and technological development zones, and the frontier economic cooperation zones in Xinjiang have made great achievements in construction and investment solicitation. Xinjiang has opened 15 trading ports, and the completion of the multiple tracking of the Lanzhou-Xinjiang Railway and the opening of the second Euro-Asia Continental Bridge has resulted in the basic formation of a modernized northwest international thoroughfare.

　　广西对外开放以来，外来投资不断增长。“八五”时期（1991—1995年）实际利用外资（含外国政府贷款）32．4亿美元，比“七五”期间（1986—1990年）增长5．6倍。至1997年末，广西累计批准外资项目8505个，合同外资金额137．9亿美元，实际利用外资67．1亿美元。目前，到广西投资的国家和地区已达30多个○。

　　Since Guangxi adopted the policy of openingto the outside world, its foreign capital has constantly increased. During the Eighth Five-Year Plan period (1991-1995), Guangxi actually utilized 3.24 billion US dollars of foreign capital (including loans from foreign governments), or 6.6 times the figure of the Seventh Five-Year Plan period (1986-1990). By the end of 1997, Guangxi had accumulatively approved 8,505 foreign-invested projects, involving 13.79 billion US dollars of contracted foreign capital, and had actually utilized 6.71 billion US dollars of foreign capital. So far, more than 30 countries and regions have invested in Guangxi11. 

　　对少数民族地区实行优惠的财政政策

　　Preferential Financial Policies for Minority Areas

　　国家财政从1955年起就设立“民族地区补助费”，1964年又设立“民族地区机动金”，并采取提高民族地区财政预备费的设置比例等优惠财政政策，帮助少数民族地区发展经济和提高人民生活水平。据统计，仅上述三项优惠政策，到1998年国家就对少数民族地区累计补助达168亿元。1980年，中央财政又对五个民族自治区及贵州、云南、青海三个少数民族比较集中的省实行定额补助制度，上述三项优惠政策也计入定额补助中继续予以保留。从1980年到1998年，少数民族自治地区获中央财政定额补助1400多亿元。1980年，国家设立支援经济不发达地区发展资金，其中很大一部分用于少数民族地区。1986年，国家设扶贫贴息贷款和以工代赈资金，其中很大一部分用于少数民族地区。1994年，国家实施“分税制”财政管理体制改革，原有对少数民族地区的补助和专项拨款政策全都保持下来。国家在1995年开始实行的过渡期转移支付办法中，对西藏等五个自治区和云南、贵州、青海以及其他省的少数民族自治州专门增设了政策性转移支付内容，对少数民族地区实行政策性倾斜，政策性转移支付额随国家财力的增长不断增加。1998年，中央对五个民族自治区和少数民族较为集中的贵州、云南、青海省的一般性转移支付额近29亿元，占全国转移支付总额的48%。

　　The state set up "ethnic region subsidies" in 1955, and the Flexible Ethnic Region Fund in 1964, and adopted the preferential financial policy of raising the proportion of the financial reserve fund of the ethnic regions to help minority areas develop their economies and improve the local people's livelihoods. According to statistics, in terms of the above-mentioned three preferential policies, the state had offered 16.8 billion yuan of subsidies to minority areas by 1998. Since 1980, the central financial authorities have adopted a quota subsidy system for the five autonomous regions and the three provinces with large ethnic minority populations--Guizhou, Yunnan and Qinghai provinces. The above-mentioned three preferential policies have also been included in the quota subsidy system. From 1980 to 1998, the autonomous areas received more than 140 billion yuan of quota subsidies from the central financial authorities. In 1980, the state set up a fund to aid the development of economically underdeveloped areas, of which a large part was used in minority areas. In 1986 the state set up the help-the-poor discount-interest loan and capital for providing employment as a form of relief, of which a large proportion was used in minority areas. In 1994 China began to reform the "revenue-sharing-scheme" financial management system. In the meantime, all the original subsidies and special financial allocation policies for minority areas were preserved. With respect to the transfer payment method for the transition period which China adopted in 1995, the state specially added the policy-related transfer-payment contents for the five autonomous regions, including Tibet, and the autonomous prefectures in Yunnan, Guizhou, Qinghai and other provinces, offering preferential policies to the ethnic minority areas. The policy-related transfer-payment sum has constantly increase along with the growth of the state's financial capacity. In 1998 the ordinary transfer-payment sum by the central authorities to the five autonomous regions and Guizhou, Yunnan and Qinghai provinces where ethnic minorities are fairly concentrated was nearly 2.9 billion yuan, making up 48 percent of the nation's total transfer-payment sum. 

　　鼓励少数民族地区发展贸易，照顾少数民族用品生产

　　Encouraging the Development of Trade in Minority Areas and Guaranteeing the Production of Articles Used by Minority Peoples 

　　国家对民族贸易实行优惠政策，扶持其发展，如1963年开始实行利润留成照顾、自有资金照顾和价格补贴照顾的“三项照顾”政策等。为尊重少数民族的风俗习惯和宗教信仰，适应和满足各少数民族生产生活特殊用品的需要，国家不仅确定了涉及服装、鞋帽、家具、绸缎、食品、生产工具、手工艺品、装饰用品、乐器等16个大类、4000余个民族用品品种，而且还采取建立专门生产基地、优先保证生产资金和原材料供应、减免税收、低息贷款、运费补贴等优惠政策。

　　The state adopts preferential policies toward ethnic trade. For instance, since 1963 it has adopted a threefold policy in this regard. This ensures a portion of reserved profits, self-owned capital and price subsidies for minority peoples. To respect the folkways, customs and religious beliefs of ethnic minorities and satisfy their needs for special articles of daily use, the state guarantees the production of more than 4,000 varieties of ethnic articles, which fall into 16 categories, such as garments, shoes, hats, furniture, silks and satins, foodstuff, production tools, handicrafts, ornaments and musical instruments. It has also extended some preferential policies, such as setting up special production bases, giving priority to the guarantee of production capital and the supply of raw and processed materials, reduction of and exemption from taxes, low-interest loans, transportation subsidies, etc. 

　　1991年以来，国家结合改革开放的新形势，对民族贸易和民族用品生产的优惠政策进行相应调整。“八五”期间（1991—1995年），国家对426个民族贸易县的商业、供销、医药企业和2300多家民族用品定点生产企业在信贷、投资、税收和商品供应等方面给予优惠照顾，并设立专项贴息贷款用于民族贸易网点建设和民族用品定点生产企业的技术改造。1997年6月，国家出台了新的民族贸易和民族用品生产的优惠政策，其中包括在“九五”期间（1996—2000年）每年由中国人民银行安排1亿元贴息贷款用于民族贸易网点建设和民族用品定点生产企业的技术改造，对县以下（不含县）国有民族贸易企业和基层供销社免征增值税等。

　　Since 1991, in light of the new situation of reform and opening-up, the state has made appropriate readjustments in the preferential policies concerning ethnic trade and the production of ethnic articles for daily use. During the Eighth Five-Year Plan period (1991-1995), the state offered preferential treatment to commercial, supply and marketing and pharmaceuticals enterprises and more than 2,300 designated enterprises for producing ethnic articles for daily use in the 426 designated ethnic trade counties in terms of credits, investment, taxation and the supply of commodities, and offered special discount-interest loans for the construction of an ethnic trade network, and the technological transformation of designated enterprises for producing ethnic articles for daily use. As part of a new package of preferential policies offered for the same purpose by the state in June 1997, the People's Bank of China will offer 100 million yuan in a discount-interest loan a year during the Ninth Five-Year Plan period (1996-2000) for the construction of an ethnic trade network and the technological transformation of the designated enterprises for producing ethnic articles for daily use, and the state-owned ethnic trade enterprises and grass-roots supply and marketing cooperatives below the county level (excluding the county) shall be exempt from value-added tax.

　　扶持少数民族贫困地区摆脱贫困

　　Helping Impoverished Minority Areas Get Rid of Poverty 
 
　　中华人民共和国成立以来，尽管少数民族人民的生活有了很大改善，但由于自然地理的制约，以及社会发展程度低、生产条件差、科技和文化知识不够普及等原因，少数民族较为集中的西部地区与东部沿海地区比较，发展相对落后，有些少数民族地区生产和生活条件还相当困难，还有部分少数民族人民的温饱问题尚未得到解决。中国自八十年代中期大规模地开展有组织有计划的扶贫工作以来，少数民族和民族地区始终是国家重点扶持对象。　　

　　Although the minority people's life has witnessed tremendous improvement since the founding of the people's Republic of China, restricted by geographical conditions, a low social development level, bad production conditions, and lack of scientific, technological and cultural knowledge, western China, where minority peoples live in concentrated communities, is relatively backward as compared with the coastal areas in eastern China. In some minority areas, production and living conditions are fairly difficult, and the people's basic needs of some people are not assured. Since the mid- 1980s, when China started a large-scale help-the-poor drive in an organized and planned way, the state has always attached importance to helping the minority peoples and minority areas.

　　在十多年的扶贫开发过程中，少数民族贫困地区除享受其他贫困地区扶贫开发的优惠政策外，还享受国家制定的一系列特殊政策：

　　During the help-the-poor efforts in the past decade or so, poverty-stricken minority areas have enjoyed the preferential help-the-poor policy offered by the Chinese government to other poverty-stricken areas, as well as a series of special policies formulated by the state:

　　放宽标准，扩大对少数民族地区的扶持范围。1986年首次确定国家重点贫困县时，将少数民族自治县列为重点贫困县的标准从全国统一的1985年人均收入低于150元放宽到200元，对牧区和民族地区的一些困难县放宽到300元。当时确定的331个国家重点扶持贫困县中有少数民族贫困县141个，占总数的42．6%。1994年开始实施《国家八七扶贫攻坚计划》时，重新调整了国家重点扶贫县对象，在确定的592个国家重点扶持贫困县中有257个少数民族县，占总数的43．4%。

　　Expanding the sphere of aiding the minority areas. In 1986, when identifying the most seriously poverty-stricken counties for the first time, the state raised the national unified standard for per capita subsidies in poverty-stricken counties from 150 yuan a year in 1985 to 200 yuan for ethnic minority autonomous counties, and 300 yuan for pastoral areas and certain other counties in minority areas. Of the 331 most seriously poverty-stricken counties designated at that time, 141 were inhabited by minority peoples, making up 42.6 percent of the total. At the start of the State Seven-Year Priority Poverty Alleviation Program (a program designated to lift 80 million people out of absolute poverty in a period of seven years from 1994 to 2000) in 1994, China readjusted the plan for the state's key poverty alleviation counties, and decided that 592 counties be the state's key poverty alleviation counties, of which 257 were ethnic minority counties, making up 43.4 percent. 

　　在扶贫资金和物资的分配上重点向少数民族贫困县倾斜。国家在分配扶贫资金和物资时将五个民族自治区全部视同西部省区，予以重点扶持。部分省区在分配扶贫资金时专门切出一部分资金用于扶持少数民族贫困县。据不完全统计，1996年至1998年国家共向257个少数民族贫困县投入中央扶贫资金169．5亿元，占扶贫资金总数的45％。

　　Giving priority to poverty-stricken ethnic minority counties in terms of the distribution of help-the-poor capital and materials. While distributing the help-the-poor capital and materials, the Chinese government put the five autonomous regions on the same footing as western China, placing them all on the priority list. Some provinces and autonomous regions allocate special funds to help the poverty-stricken ethnic minority counties while distributing the help-the-poor funds. According to incomplete statistics, from 1996 to 1998 the state allocated 16.95 billion yuan from the Central Government's help-the-poor funds to the 257 poverty-stricken ethnic minority counties, making up 45 percent of the total. 

　　对少数民族贫困地区安排专项扶贫资金。从1983年到2002年，中央政府每年拨出2亿元专款用于甘肃和宁夏少数民族比较集中的“三西”（甘肃省的定西、河西地区和宁夏回族自治区的西海固地区）干旱地区的农业建设。从1990年起，国家专门设立了“少数民族贫困地区温饱基金”，重点扶持全国143个少数民族贫困县。

　　Arranging special help-the-poor funds for the poverty-stricken ethnic minority areas. Since 1983, the Central Government has allocated a yearly 200 million yuan of special funds for the agricultural construction of the arid "three Xis" (Dingxi and Hexi prefectures in Gansu Province, and Xihaigu Prefecture in the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region), where ethnic minority people live in concentrated communities; and it will continue to do so up to the year 2002. In 1990, the state set up the "basic need fund for the poverty-stricken ethnic minority areas", putting stress on helping the 143 poverty-stricken ethnic minority counties throughout the country.

　　积极开展同国际组织在少数民族贫困地区扶贫开发的合作。1995年以来，世界银行在中国实施了三期扶贫项目，贷款规模总计6．1亿美元，覆盖了广西、内蒙古、宁夏及其他省区的43个少数民族贫困县。
 
　　Actively conducting cooperation with international organizations in poverty alleviation and development in the poverty-stricken ethnic minority areas. Since 1995, the World Bank has implemented three phases of a help-the-poor project in China, involving a total loan of 610 million US dollars, and covering 43 poverty-stricken ethnic minority counties in Guangxi, Inner Mongolia, Ningxia and other places. 

　　组织东部省、市同少数民族地区开展扶贫协作。1996年，中央政府决定组织九个沿海发达省、直辖市和四个计划单列市对口帮助西部10个贫困省、自治区，三年来共捐款捐物10．4亿元，实施合作项目2074个，投资近40亿元。

　　Organizing the provinces and municipalities in east China to start help-the-poor cooperation with the minority areas. In 1996 the Central Government decided to organize nine developed coastal provinces and municipalities and four cities with economic planning directly supervised by the State Council to help 10 poverty-stricken provinces and autonomous regions in western China. In the past three they have donated money and materials valued at 1.04 billion yuan, and carried out 2,074 cooperation projects, involving a total investment of nearly four billion yuan. 

　　通过十多年的扶贫开发，中国少数民族地区人民的生产和生活条件得到了明显改善。从1995年到1998年，257个少数民族贫困县解决了1092万人、1514万头牲畜饮水问题，五个民族自治区贫困人口从835万人下降到473万人，贫困发生率由12．4%下降到6．9%，贫困县农民人均纯收入从833元增加到1395元。同时，少数民族地区基础设施建设进一步加快。1995年到1998年，新修基本农田1000多万亩，修建公路6．9万公里，架设输变电线路11．7万公里。

　　Thanks to the help-the-poor efforts in the last decade or so, the production and living conditions of the people of the minority areas in China have improved remarkably. From 1995 to 1998, 257 poverty-stricken ethnic minority counties had solved the drinking water problem for 10.92 million people and 15.14 million head of livestock; the poverty-stricken population of the five autonomous regions shrank from 8.35 million to 4.73 million; the poverty rate dropped from 12.4 percent to 6.9 percent; and the net annual income per farmer in the poverty-stricken counties increased from 833 yuan to 1,395 yuan. Meanwhile, the construction of infrastructure facilities in minority areas has been further speeded up. Between 1995 and 1998 about 667,000 ha of basic farmland were constructed, newly built highways and rough roads extended 69,000 km, and transmission and transformer lines totaled 117,000 km.

　　对少数民族实行宽于汉族的生育政策

　　Implementing a More Lenient Childbirth Policy with Minority Peoples Than with the Han People 

　　为提高少数民族人口素质，加快民族自治地方的经济社会发展，中国各民族自治地方的人民代表大会，根据国家有关少数民族也要实行计划生育的精神，制定了本地区少数民族的计划生育政策。其生育政策宽于汉族的生育政策，一般规定，少数民族家庭可以生育两个或三个孩子；边境地区和自然环境恶劣的地区、人口特别稀少的少数民族可以生育三个以上的孩子；西藏自治区的藏族农牧民可以不受限制地生育子女。这使得少数民族人口的增长速度高于全国平均水平。1953年全国第一次人口普查时，新疆的少数民族人口为454万人，1990年全国第四次人口普查时，新疆的少数民族人口增至946万人，到1998年，新疆的少数民族人口达到1046．01万人，占新疆总人口的62％。1952年，以达赖为首的西藏地方政府向中央政府申报的西藏人口为100万人，到1998年，西藏人口已增至252万人，仅藏族人口就增加了120万人。目前，藏族人口约占全自治区总人口的94％。

　　To improve the quality of the ethnic minority population and accelerate the economic and social development of the ethnic minority autonomous areas, the people's congresses of these areas have formulated their own family planning policies toward the ethnic minorities in light of the spirit of the state's regulations concerning the need also for minority peoples to practice family planning. These policies are more lenient than those with the Han people. Under these policies, an ethnic minority family generally may have two or three children; in frontier areas and areas with adverse geographical conditions, families of ethnic minorities with very small populations may have more than three children each; and Tibetan farmers and herdsmen in the Tibet Autonomous Region may have as many children as they like. As a result, ethnic minority populations have been able to increase at a higher rate than the rest of the population. The population of ethnic minorities in Xinjiang was 4.54 million, according to the first national census, taken in 1953, and it increased to 9.46 million in the fourth census, taken in 1990. By 1998, the total population of ethnic minorities in Xinjiang was 10.4601 million, accounting for 62 percent of the total population of the autonomous region. In 1952, the Tibetan local government, headed by the 14th Dalai Lama, reported to the Central Government that the population of Tibet was one million. By the end of 1998, the population of Tibet had increased to 2.52 million, of which the increase of Tibetan population was 1.2 million. At present, the Tibetan population accounts for 94 percent of the total population of the Tibet Autonomous Region.

　　支持和帮助少数民族地区发展教育

　　Helping the Minority Areas to Develop Education 

　　民族教育是中国教育事业的重要组成部分。发展民族教育，对于提高少数民族人口素质，促进少数民族地区的经济文化发展，有着重要意义。国家根据现代化建设的需要和发展教育事业的方针政策，坚持从少数民族的特点和民族地区的实际出发，积极支持和帮助少数民族发展教育事业。

　　Education among national minorities is an important part of the education of China. The development of education among national minorities is of paramount importance to the improvement of the quality of the minority population and the promotion of economic and cultural development in ethnic minority areas. In conformity with the needs of the modernization drive and the policies of educational development, the state persists in proceeding from the characteristics of minority peoples and the reality of minority areas and gives active support and assistance to minority peoples in their efforts for educational development. 

　　国家采取了许多政策和措施支持少数民族教育事业的发展，如赋予和尊重少数民族自治地方自主发展民族教育的权利，重视民族语文教学和双语教学，加强少数民族师资队伍建设，在经费上给予特殊照顾，举办民族院校和民族班，实行定向招生，积极开展内地省市对少数民族地区教育的对口支援，全国支援西藏教育事业等。

　　The state has adopted many policies and measures to support the development of education among minority peoples. For instance, it respects the autonomous areas' right to develop ethnic education on their own, attaches importance to teaching in minority languages and bilingual teaching, strengthens the building of the ranks of minority teachers, offers special care in terms of funds, runs ethnic institutes, schools and classes that enroll students for future service in specific areas or units, actively starts counterpart educational support between inland provinces and municipalities and minority areas, and mobilizes the whole nation to support education in Tibet. 
　　国家对贫困地区特别是少数民族贫困地区的普及义务教育给予重点扶持。1993年，国家有关部门提出了经济、教育比较发达的省、直辖市与国家重点扶持的143个少数民族贫困县开展教育对口支援协作的意见，明确了协作关系和教育扶贫的主要任务。国家教育部和财政部联合组织实施了国家贫困地区义务教育工程。按照工程规划，在1995—2000年间，中央财政将投入39亿元，加上地方配套资金将超过100亿元。这项工程的启动，对推动少数民族贫困地区的普及义务教育有着重要作用。国家鼓励通过建立“希望工程”等形式资助民族地区发展基础教育，如1995年湖南湘西土家族苗族自治州通过“希望工程”建成了136所希望小学，解决了数万少数民族贫困儿童的失学问题。

　　The state has paid great attention to promoting universal compulsory education in poverty-stricken areas, especially poverty-stricken ethnic minority areas. In 1993, the relevant government departments proposed that counterpart support and cooperation between the economically and educationally advanced provinces and municipalities and the 143 poverty-stricken ethnic minority counties under government supervision should be started, and defined the cooperative relations and the main tasks of helping the poor through education. The Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Finance jointly organized the implementation of the state's compulsory education project for the poverty-stricken areas. In accordance with the project's plan, between 1995 and 2000, the central authorities will invest 3.9 billion yuan into this project, which will exceed 10 billion yuan if the supporting capital to be contributed by local authorities is added to it. The launching of this project will play an important role in promoting the popularization of compulsory education in poverty-stricken ethnic minority areas. The state encourages people to help minority areas to develop basic education through the "Hope Project" and other forms. For instance, the Western Hunan Tujia-Miao Autonomous Prefecture has founded 136 Hope primary schools, thus enabling tens of thousands of poverty-stricken minority children to attend to school. 

    国家兴办了一批民族院校。截至1998年，国家独立设置的民族院校有民族大学和民族学院12所、民族师范学校59所、民族职业中学158所、民族中学3536所、民族小学20906所。民族院校先后开设了一些民族预科班，在其他的一些高等学校、中等专业学校和成人高等学校也相继举办了相当数量的少数民族预科班。1998年，全国举办民族预科班的高等院校达80余所，当年计划招生7142名。预科教育对提高少数民族学生的文化基础知识，使更多的少数民族学生升入高、中等专业学校学习起了很大的作用，它已成为主要为少数民族学生举办的独具特色的办学形式。

　　The state itself runs a number of ethnic institutes and schools. By the end of 1998, the state had independently founded 12 ethnic universities and institutes, 59 ethnic teachers' training schools, 158 ethnic secondary vocational schools, 3,536 ethnic middle schools, and 20,906 ethnic primary schools. Ethnic institutions of higher learning, secondary specialized schools and adult institutions of high learning and ordinary higher educational institutions, conduct quite a number of preparatory classes for minority peoples. In 1998, more than 80 institutions of higher learning in China held such classes, with a planned enrollment of 7,142 students. Preparatory education has played a great role in improving minority students' basic cultural knowledge, and enabling more minority students to continue their studies at secondary and higher specialized schools. It has become a unique way of developing education geared to the needs of minority students. 

　　保护和发展少数民族文化

　　 Preservation and Development of the Cultures of Ethnic Minorities 

    中国各少数民族在长期的历史发展过程中，都形成了本民族独具特色和风格各异的文化。在中国，少数民族传统文化受到尊重和保护，各民族都可以自由地保持和发展本民族的文化。
      
　　China's ethnic minorities have formed their unique cultures in the long process of historical development. China respects and preserves the traditional cultures of ethnic minorities, and all of the minority peoples are free to maintain and develop their own cultures.

　　尊重少数民族风俗习惯

　　Respecting the Folkways and Customs of Minority Peoples

　　中国各少数民族的风俗习惯差异较大，具有不同的生产方式和生活方式，表现在服饰、饮食、居住、婚姻、礼仪、丧葬等多方面。国家尊重少数民族风俗习惯，少数民族享有保持或改革本民族风俗习惯的权利。在社会生活的各方面，政府对少数民族保持或改革本民族风俗习惯的权利加以保护。

　　The various ethnic minority groups in China differ widely in their folkways and customs. They have different modes of production and life styles, as displayed in dress and adornments, diet, residences, marriage, etiquette and funerals. The minority peoples have the right to retain or change their folkways and customs, which are respected by the state. The government protects such rights in every aspect of social life. 

　　在中国，约有十个少数民族有食用清真食品的传统习惯。为妥善解决好食用清真食品的少数民族的伙食问题，国家在食用清真食品的少数民族较多的机关、学校、企事业单位，设立清真食堂或清真伙食，人数较少的采取几个单位联合举办或备专门灶具。在食用清真食品的少数民族较集中的地方，广设清真饮食网点，在城市、交通要道、饭店、旅馆、医院，以及列车、轮船、飞机等交通设施上，设清真食堂或清真伙食点。国家对经营清真饮食有严格的规定，要求对食用清真食品的少数民族食用的牛羊肉，在屠宰、包装、运输、加工、销售等各环节上，都必须标明“清真”字样。在食用清真食品的少数民族聚居的大、中城市，国家有关部门设立专门经营牛羊肉的批发部门或零售机构，并在政策上给予优惠。

　　In China, about ten minority peoples have the tradition of eating Muslim food. Taking this into consideration, the state has established Muslim canteens or supplies Muslim food in state organs, schools, enterprises and institutions. In some work units where people eating Muslim food are few, Muslim canteens are jointly established by several units or Muslim food is specially prepared. Muslim food and beverage shops can be found in places where Muslim ethnic minorities live in concentrated communities. In cities, communication hubs, restaurants, hotels and hospitals, and on trains, ships and airplanes, Muslim catering is provided. The state stipulates that ``Muslim food'' must be marked on beef and mutton sold to ethnic minorities which eat Muslim food at all the stages of slaughtering, packaging, transporting, processing and selling. In large and medium-sized cities where there are large numbers of ethnic minority people who eat Muslim food, the relevant state departments have established special beef and mutton wholesale departments or retail shops and given them preferential treatment. 

　　中国各少数民族的丧葬习俗各有不同，有火葬、土葬、水葬、天葬等不同的葬法。政府尊重少数民族的丧葬习俗。对回族、维吾尔族等一些习惯土葬的少数民族，国家划拨专用土地，建立公墓，并设立专门为这些少数民族服务的殡葬服务部门。现在，全国凡有回族等习惯实行土葬的少数民族居住的大、中、小城市，都建有公墓。同样，对藏族实行的天葬、土葬、水葬，国家也给予保护和尊重。

　　The forms of burial vary among China's ethnic minorities, including cremation, inhumation, "water burial" and "sky burial" (exposure burial). The government respects minority peoples' burial customs, and has allotted land for cemeteries and established burial services departments specially for Hui, Uygur and other minority peoples that have the tradition of inhumation. Throughout the country, cemeteries can be found in large, medium and small cities where Hui and other minority peoples preferring inhumation live. The burial custom of Tibetans has also been respected; they can choose whatever form of burial they prefer--"sky burial", inhumation or "water burial". 

　　中国各少数民族年节习俗丰富多彩。如：藏族的藏历新年、“雪顿节”，回、维吾尔等民族的“开斋节”、“古尔邦节”，蒙古族的“那达慕”，傣族的“泼水节”，彝族的“火把节”，等等。各少数民族自由地按本民族的传统习惯欢度节日，国家按照各少数民族年节习惯安排假日，并供应节日特殊食品。

　　Ethnic minorities have rich traditions of festivals, including the New Year and Shoton (Yogurt) Festival of the Tibetan people, the Fast-breaking and Corban festivals of the Hui and Uygur peoples, the Nadam Fair of the Mongolian people, the Water Sprinkling Festival of the Dai people and the Torch Festival of the Yi people. The various ethnic minority groups in China are free to celebrate their own traditional festivals, and the state gives them holidays and supplies special food for the holidays.

　　保护少数民族文化遗产

　　Preservation of the Cultural Heritage of Ethnic Minorities 

　　为使各少数民族传统文化得到保护，国家有计划地组织对各少数民族的文化遗产进行搜集、整理、翻译和出版工作，保护少数民族的名胜古迹、珍贵文物和其他重要历史文化遗产。

　　To preserve the traditional cultures of the ethnic minorities, the state has formulated plans or organized specialists for work involving the collecting, editing, translating and publishing of their cultural heritage and the protecting of their famous historical monuments, scenic spots, rare cultural relics and other important items of the historical and cultural heritage. 

　　国家成立了全国少数民族古籍整理出版规划小组和办公室，组织和领导全国少数民族古籍整理工作。全国现有25个省、自治区、直辖市，130个自治州、地、盟建立了民族古籍整理与研究机构，民族院校也建有古籍整理与研究机构。截至1998年，已搜集少数民族古籍12万余种，整理11万余种，出版古籍书籍5000余种。国家组织3000多名专家学者，完成了关于少数民族的五种丛书的编辑出版工作，包括中国少数民族简史、少数民族语言简志、民族自治地方概况等丛书400多种，9000多万字。现在，中国55个少数民族都各自有了一部文字记载的简史。

　　A national planning section and office have been established by the state to organize the editing and publishing of ancient books of ethnic minorities. Currently, about 25 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities, 130 autonomous prefectures, prefectures and leagues and other minority areas, and some ethnic colleges and schools have established institutions for the same purpose. By the end of 1998, more than 120,000 titles of ethnic minorities' ancient books have been collected, of which, over 110,000 have been edited and 5,000 published. More than 3,000 experts and scholars organized by the state have finished the editing and publishing of five series on ethnic minority issues, including A Brief History of China's Ethnic Minorities, Brief Records of Ethnic Minorities' Languages, and A General Survey of Autonomous Ethnic Minority Areas, comprising over 400 titles and 90 million words. Now each of the 55 minority ethnic groups has a brief written history. 

　　中国政府设立了中国少数民族三大英雄史诗《格萨尔》（藏族民间说唱体长篇英雄史诗）、《江格尔》（蒙古族著名的英雄史诗）、《玛纳斯》（柯尔克孜族著名的传记性史诗）专门工作机构，有计划有组织地进行收集、整理、翻译、研究工作。出版了包括少数民族文字、汉文和多种外国文字版本的三大史诗以及一些研究专著，仅关于《格萨尔》就出版了300多万字的大型学术资料汇编《格萨尔集成》，涌现出一批卓有成就的“格学”研究专家。近年来，国家拨付了以千万元计的巨额资金支持校勘出版共计150部的传统藏学的百科全书《中华大藏经》。

　　The Chinese government has set up special institutions for the collection, editing, translation and research of the three major epics of ethnic minorities: Gesar of the Tibetan, Jianggar of the Mongolians and Manas of the Kirgiz. The three epics and treatises concerning them have been published in the appropriate ethnic minority languages, Chinese and foreign languages. The publishing of the Corpus of Gesar Studies in more than three million words brought many distinguished Gesar studies experts to the fore. In recent years, the state has earmarked tens of millions of yuan for the publishing of Zhonghua Dazang Jing, an encyclopedia of Tibetan studies in 150 volumes. 

　　从五十年代初开始，中国各级政府以及文化艺术部门组织了数以万计的人类学、社会学、民族学专家和文学艺术工作者，深入到少数民族聚居地区，抢救、搜集流传在民间的传统文化艺术。八十年代初，中国政府又投入大量资金和人力物力，搜集整理各民族民间文艺资料，编纂了《中国民间歌曲集成》、《中国民族民间器乐曲集成》、《中国民间故事集成》、《中国民间谚语集成》等包括各民族文学、音乐、舞蹈诸门类的十大文艺集成，共计整理出版310卷，全部出齐约450卷，总计约4．5亿字。

　　Beginning in the early 1950s, governments at various levels and culture and arts departments have organized tens of thousands of experts in anthropology, sociology and ethnology, and writers and artists to collect and preserve traditional folk cultures and arts in regions where minority peoples live. At the beginning of the 1980s, the Chinese government put in much capital and efforts into the collection and editing of the folk cultural and arts materials of the minority peoples. The compilation of ten collections of literature, music and dance of minority peoples, comprising 450 volumes in 450 million words, including the Collection of Chinese Folk Songs, Collection of Folk Instrument Tunes of China's Ethnic Minorities, Collection of Chinese Folk Tales, and Collection of Chinese Folk Proverbs have been completed, and 310 volumes have already been published.

　　近十年来，国家投入巨资对西藏拉萨的哲蚌寺、色拉寺、甘丹寺，青海的塔尔寺，新疆的克孜尔千佛洞等大批国家重点文物古迹进行了维修。特别是1989年至1994年，国家投入5300万元、黄金1000公斤，对著名的布达拉宫进行了维修。各地还建立了一些博物馆、文化馆，搜集、保护少数民族文物。投资近亿元的西藏博物馆已建成使用。

　　In addition, in the past decade the state has invested a great deal of capital in maintaining cultural relics and historical sites, including the Drepung, Sera and Gandan monasteries in the Tibetan capital Lhasa, the Kumbum Monastery in Qinghai Province and the Kilzil Thousand-Buddha Cave in Xinjiang. Between 1989 and 1994, the state invested 53 million yuan and 1,000 kg of gold in repairing the famous Potala Palace in Lhasa. In addition, museums and cultural centers have been established in various places for the collection and preservation of cultural relics of ethnic minorities. Among them, the Tibet Museum cost nearly 100 million yuan to construct. 

　　繁荣少数民族文化艺术事业

　　Promoting Ethnic Minorities' Cultural and Arts Undertakings
 
　　国家和有关部门通过组建少数民族文艺团体、艺术院校、文化馆和群众艺术馆等措施，大力培养少数民族文艺人才，繁荣少数民族文艺创作，发展少数民族文化艺术事业。五十年代初，在北京建立了国家级的中央民族歌舞团，由各民族演员组成，创作各少数民族歌舞节目，到全国各地演出，还数十次把中国少数民族文艺节目带到世界各国演出。到目前为止，全国民族自治地方有各类艺术表演团体534个，艺术表演场所194处，图书馆661个，群众艺术馆82个，文化馆679个，文化站7318个，博物馆155个。全国五个民族自治区和云南、贵州、吉林等省有24所高等和中等艺术院校，专门培养少数民族艺术人才。

　　The state and relevant departments devote great efforts to fostering literary and artistic talent among the minority peoples, and promoting the creation of literature and art by setting up literature and art organizations, art institutes and schools, cultural centers and mass art centers. In the early 1950s, the national-level Central Ethnic Song and Dance Ensemble was established in Beijing. It is composed of performers from various ethnic groups, and performs ethnic songs and dances of its own creation both in China and abroad. To date, in autonomous areas, there are 534 art troupes, 194 sites for art performances, 661 libraries, 82 mass art centers, 679 cultural centers, 7,318 culture-dissemination stations and 155 museums. Furthermore, there are 24 art colleges and secondary-level art schools in the five autonomous regions and Yunnan, Guizhou and Jilin provinces specially for fostering artistically talented people among China's ethnic minorities. 

　　曾经濒于灭绝的维吾尔族巨大音乐经典套曲“十二木卡姆”，由四十年代末仅有两三个高龄艺人能够较完整地演唱发展到成立新疆木卡姆艺术团、木卡姆研究室，广泛演唱，得到发扬光大。已有500多年历史的藏戏不仅得到保护和发扬，而且在每年的雪顿节期间与其他歌舞、话剧相映生辉，使雪顿节成为藏民族欢乐喜庆的综合艺术节。

　　The "Twelve Mukams" opera, a classical musical treasure of the Uygur people, which was on the verge of being lost, has been preserved. At the end of the 1940s, only two or three elderly musicians could sing it completely. But now it is flourishing, since the Mukam Art Troupe and Mukam Research Office have been established in Xinjiang. In addition, Tibetan opera, which has a history of over 500 years, is well preserved and flourishing. Every year, it is included in the Shoton Festival, together with other singing, dancing and drama performances. 

　　国家定期举办少数民族音乐、舞蹈、戏剧“孔雀奖”评比和少数民族题材的电影、电视、文学“骏马奖”评选。国家自1992年开始在少数民族聚居的广西、云南、西藏、新疆、内蒙古、黑龙江、吉林等九个省、自治区实施“全国万里边疆文化长廊建设”工程。几年来，各级政府投入大量资金，建成了一批公共文化基础设施，改善和丰富了当地的文化生活，受益的边疆各族人民群众达1000多万人。

　　The state regularly conducts the competition for the "Peacock Award" for ethnic minorities' music, dance and drama and the "Stallion Award" for films, television programs and literary works dealing with minority peoples. Beginning in 1992, the state started to carry out the "Long Cultural Corridor Construction in the Nation's Border Areas" projects in nine autonomous regions and provinces where minority peoples are concentrated, including Guangxi, Yunnan, Tibet, Xinjiang, Inner Mongolia, Heilongjiang and Jilin. In the past few years, governments at various levels have also put large amounts of funds into the construction of many cultural infrastructure facilities, which have improved and enriched the cultural life of more than ten million ethnic minority people. 

　　近十多年来，少数民族文化艺术团体扩大对外交流，活跃在国际舞台上，从中央到地方已有100多个少数民族艺术团体走向世界。

　　In the past decade or more, ethnic minority culture and art troupes have extended their exchanges with the outside world, and over 100 of them, national and local, have performed in other countries and regions. 

　　少数民族作家队伍不断壮大，一大批少数民族作家茁壮成长，创作了大量文学作品。中国作家协会少数民族会员的比例已超过10%，人数近600人。

　　The ranks of ethnic minority writers are continuously growing. A large number of such writers have come to the fore and created a great number of literary works. Nearly 600 writers belonging to ethnic minorities are members of the Chinese Writers' Association, constituting more than 10 percent.

　　少数民族工艺美术异彩纷呈。藏族壁画艺术不断充实，增加了表现藏族发展史和藏族人民新生活的内容。藏族卷轴画唐卡艺术得到保护。维吾尔族、蒙古族的地毯、壁挂，从民族地区风行到全中国，外销世界上许多国家和地区。布依、苗、瑶、仡佬等民族的蜡染，而今更为流行，且图案、花样、品种都有很大发展。土家、壮、傣、黎、侗等民族的织锦技艺，已从过去的一家一户的小型作业发展到织锦工艺厂，生产规模不断扩大。

　　The arts and handicrafts of minority peoples are a splendid legacy. The mural art of the Tibetans is continuously enriched with contents depicting the development history of the Tibetan ethnic group and the new lives of the Tibetan people. The Tibetan art of scroll painting, or Tangka, is well preserved. The carpets and wall hangings made by the Uygur and Mongolian peoples are very popular on the Chinese and overseas markets. The wax-printing art of the Bouyei, Miao, Yao and Gelo ethnic groups is growing in popularity, with great improvement in designs, patterns and varieties. And the brocade technique of the Tujia, Zhuang, Dai, Li and Dong ethnic groups has developed from small-scale family workshops to today's brocade mills, whose production scale has been on the increase.

　　保护发展少数民族传统医药

　　Preserving and Developing the Traditional Medicine of Ethnic Minorities 

　　国家大力培养少数民族医药人才，在西藏、内蒙古、新疆等地相继成立了藏医、蒙医、维吾尔医高等院校，已培养民族医药人员2531人。其中西藏藏医学院建立近十年来，共培养各类藏医药人才500多人。目前，全国共有民族医院127所，其中藏医院52所，蒙医院41所，维吾尔医院26所，其他民族医院8所。国家积极扶持对少数民族医药的开发和应用。1992年，国家确定了蒙药、藏药、维吾尔药的制剂中心，将传统医药与现代研制技术相结合，已经生产了十几种剂型，上百种藏药、蒙药、维吾尔药品种。

　　The state has made great efforts to foster medical specialists for minority peoples. It has established medical colleges and universities of Tibetan, Mongolian and Uygur medicine in the Tibet, Inner Mongolia and Xinjiang autonomous regions, respectively, which have trained 2,531 specialists. Of them, more than 500 have been trained by the Tibet College of Tibetan Medicine, founded nearly ten years ago. Nowadays, there are 127 hospitals of ethnic minority medicine all over the country, of which, 52 are Tibetan medicine hospitals, 41 are Mongolian medicine hospitals, 26 are Uygur medicine hospitals and eight specialize in the traditional medicine of other minority groups. Also, the state has provided active support for the development and application of ethnic minority traditional medicine. In 1992, the state gave permission for the setting up of centers for making of Mongolian, Tibetan and Uygur pharmaceutical preparations. They manufacture more than ten kinds of pharmaceutical preparations and over 100 kinds of traditional medicines with the combination of traditional and modern expertise. 

　　发展少数民族传统体育运动

　　Developing the Traditional Sports of Ethnic Minorities

　　中国少数民族传统体育运动源于广大少数民族群众的生活，内容丰富，形式多样，历史悠久，特点鲜明，不仅具有高度的技巧，而且常常伴有歌舞、音乐，如赛马、射箭、马上游戏“叼羊”、摔跤、荡秋千、跳板、赛龙舟、登山等等。中国各少数民族自治地方都建立了体育工作机构，积极培养少数民族体育人才，开展民族传统体育和现代体育活动，提高少数民族的健康水平。现已挖掘、搜集、整理出少数民族传统体育项目290多个。1953年，在天津举办了全国首次民族传统体育表演及竞赛大会，即第一届全国少数民族传统体育运动会。1982年后，中国每四年举办一次全国少数民族传统体育运动会。第六届全国少数民族传统体育运动会于1999年9月在北京举行，同时在西藏自治区首府拉萨设立分赛场。全国已有25个省、自治区、直辖市每四年举办一次少数民族传统体育运动会。

　　The traditional sports of ethnic minorities originate from the daily life of the people and are rich in content and form, and have distinct characteristics and a long history. They call for skill of a high order, and most of them are accompanied with music, or singing and dancing. They include horse racing, archery, sheep-chasing on horseback, wrestling, swinging, springboard jumping, dragon-boat racing and mountaineering. Physical culture and sports institutions have been established in the various autonomous areas to train people in ethnic sports, develop traditional ethnic and modern sports activities and improve the health of minority peoples. To date, more than 290 kinds of traditional ethnic sports have been revived. In 1953, the first traditional ethnic sports show and competition was held in Tianjin, known as the First National Traditional Ethnic Minority Sports Meet. Beginning in 1982, such meets have been held every four years, and the sixth one was held in Beijing in September 1999, with some contests held in Lhasa, the capital of the Tibet Autonomous Region. Throughout the country, there are 25 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities that hold traditional ethnic minority sports meets every four years. 

　　中华人民共和国的五十年实践证明，中国的民族政策是成功的，走出了一条符合自己国情的解决民族问题和实现各民族共同发展的正确道路。同时，中国政府也清楚地看到，由于历史和自然地理等因素的制约和影响，中国中西部少数民族较为集中的地区与东部沿海地区相比，在发展上还存在着较大差距，有部分少数民族地区人民还未解决温饱问题，有些地区因生产条件较差严重影响持续发展。这些问题已经引起中国政府的高度重视，并正在采取措施加以解决。中国政府相信，随着国家改革开放和现代化建设事业的发展，中国各民族必将得到更快、更好的发展，在即将到来的二十一世纪，中国各民族平等、团结、互助的关系必将得到进一步巩固和发展。

　　Fifty years of experience has proved that the policies toward ethnic minorities of the People's Republic of China are successful ones. China has blazed a correct way for handling ethnic problems and realizing the common prosperity of the various ethnic groups in conformity with China's reality. In the meantime, however, the Chinese government is well aware of the fact that, due to the restrictions and influences of history, physical geography and other factors, central and western China, where most ethnic minority people live, lag far behind the eastern coastal areas in development. In some ethnic minority areas, the people are inadequately fed and clothed, and while in some other areas sustained development has been adversely affected by poor production conditions. The Chinese government attaches great importance to these problems, and is taking measures to solve them. The Chinese government is convinced that, as the reform, opening-up and modernization drive develop, the various ethnic groups of China will develop in a still more rapid and healthy way, and the relations between ethnic groups marked by equality, unity and mutual help are certain to be further consolidated and developed in the coming 21st century. 

一个中国的原则与台湾问题
The One-China Principle and the Taiwan Issue

中华人民共和国国务院台湾事务办公室、国务院新闻办公室
Taiwan Affairs Office and the Information Office of the State Council

二○○○年二月·北京
Feb 2000, Beijing
    

目　　录
Contents

前　　言
Foreword

一个中国的事实和法理基础
The Basis for One China, de Facto and de Jure

一个中国原则是实现和平统一的基础和前提
 The One-China Principle-the Basis and Prerequisite for Achieving Peaceful Reunification

中国政府坚决捍卫一个中国原则
 The Chinese Government-Staunch Champion for the One-China Principle

两岸关系中涉及一个中国原则的若干问题
 Several Questions Involving the One-China Principle in the Cross-Straits Relations

在国际社会中坚持一个中国原则的若干问题
 Several Questions Involving Adherence to the One-China Principle in the International Community

结束语
Conclusion 
    

　　前言
   
　　Foreword

　　一九四九年十月一日，中国人民取得了新民主主义革命的伟大胜利，建立了中华人民共和国。国民党统治集团退踞中国的台湾省，在外国势力的支持下，与中央政府对峙，由此产生了台湾问题。

　　On October 1, 1949, the Chinese people won a great victory in the new democratic revolution and founded the People's Republic of China (PRC). The Kuomintang (KMT) ruling clique retreated from the mainland to entrench in China's Taiwan Province in confrontation with the Central Government with the support of foreign forces. This is the origin of the Taiwan issue.

　　解决台湾问题，实现中国完全统一，是中华民族的根本利益。五十年来，中国政府为此进行了不懈的奋斗。一九七九年后，中国政府以极大的诚意、尽最大的努力，争取以“一国两制”的方式实现和平统一。自一九八七年底以来，两岸经济、文化交流和人员往来有了长足的发展。但是，九十年代以来，台湾当局领导人李登辉逐步背弃一个中国原则，极力推行以制造“两个中国”为核心的分裂政策，一直发展到公然主张两岸关系是“国家与国家，至少是特殊的国与国的关系”，严重损害了两岸和平统一的基础，危害了包括台湾同胞在内的整个中华民族的根本利益，也危害了亚洲太平洋地区的和平与稳定。中国政府始终如一地坚持一个中国原则，坚决反对任何把台湾从中国分割出去的图谋。中国政府与以李登辉为首的分裂势力的斗争，集中表现在是坚持一个中国原则还是制造“两个中国”、“一中一台”的问题上。

　　Settlement of the Taiwan issue and realization of the complete reunification of China embodies the fundamental interests of the Chinese nation. The Chinese government has worked persistently toward this goal in the past 50 years. From 1979, the Chinese government has striven for the peaceful reunification of China in the form of "one country, two systems" with the greatest sincerity and the utmost effort. Economic and cultural exchanges and people-to-people contacts between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits have made rapid progress since the end of 1987. Unfortunately, from the 1990s, Lee Teng-hui, the leader of the Taiwan authorities, has progressively betrayed the One-China Principle, striving to promote a separatist policy with "two Chinas" at the core, going so far as to openly describe the cross-Straits relations as "state to state relations, or at least special state to state relations." This action has seriously damaged the basis for peaceful reunification of the two sides, harmed the fundamental interests of the entire Chinese nation including the Taiwan compatriots, and jeopardized peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region. The Chinese government has consistently adhered to the One-China Principle and resolutely opposed any attempt to separate Taiwan from China. The struggle between the Chinese government and the separatist forces headed by Lee Teng-hui finds its concentrated expression in the question of whether to persevere in the One-China Principle or to create "two Chinas" or "One-China, one Taiwan."

　　我们于一九九三年八月发表了《台湾问题与中国的统一》白皮书，系统地论述了台湾是中国不可分割的一部分、台湾问题的由来、中国政府解决台湾问题的基本方针和有关政策。现在，有必要进一步向国际社会阐述中国政府坚持一个中国原则的立场和政策。

　　In August 1993, we issued a white paper entitled The Taiwan Question and Reunification of China, which systematically expounds the fact concerning Taiwan as an inalienable part of China, the origin of the Taiwan issue and the Chinese government's basic principles and related policies regarding resolution of the Taiwan question. We deem it necessary here to further explain to the international community the Chinese government's position and policy on the One-China Principle.
    
　　一个中国的事实和法理基础

　　The Basis for One China, de Facto and de Jure

　　一个中国原则是在中国人民捍卫中国主权和领土完整的正义斗争中形成的，具有不可动摇的事实和法理基础。

　　The One-China Principle has been evolved in the course of the Chinese people's just struggle to safeguard China's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and its basis, both de facto and de jure, is unshakable.

    台湾是中国不可分割的一部分。有关台湾的全部事实和法律证明，台湾是中国领土不可分割的一部分。一八九五年四月，日本通过侵华战争，强迫清朝政府签订不平等的《马关条约》，霸占了台湾。一九三七年七月，日本发动全面侵华战争。一九四一年十二月，中国政府在《中国对日宣战布告》中昭告各国，中国废止包括《马关条约》在内的一切涉及中日关系的条约、协定、合同，并将收复台湾。一九四三年十二月，中美英三国政府发表的《开罗宣言》规定，日本应将所窃取于中国的包括东北、台湾、澎湖列岛等在内的土地，归还中国。一九四五年，中美英三国共同签署、后来又有苏联参加的《波茨坦公告》规定：“开罗宣言之条件必将实施。”同年八月，日本宣布投降，并在《日本投降条款》中承诺“忠诚履行波茨坦公告各项规定之义务”。十月二十五日，中国政府收复台湾、澎湖列岛，重新恢复对台湾行使主权。

　　Taiwan is an inalienable part of China. All the facts and laws about Taiwan prove that Taiwan is an inalienable part of Chinese territory. In April 1895, through a war of aggression against China, Japan forced the Qing government to sign the unequal Treaty of Shimonoseki, and forcibly occupied Taiwan. In July 1937, Japan launched an all-out war of aggression against China. In December 1941, the Chinese government issued the Proclamation of China's Declaration of War Against Japan, announcing to the world that all treaties, agreements and contracts concerning Sino-Japanese relations, including the Treaty of Shimonoseki, had been abrogated, and that China would recover Taiwan. In December 1943, the Cairo Declaration was issued by the Chinese, U.S. and British governments, stipulating that Japan should return to China all the territories it had stolen from the Chinese, including Northeast China, Taiwan and the Penghu Archipelago. The Potsdam Proclamation signed by China, the United States and Britain in 1945 (later adhered to by the Soviet Union) stipulated that "The terms of the Cairo Declaration shall be carried out." In August of that year, Japan declared surrender and promised in its instrument of surrender that it would faithfully fulfil the obligations laid down in the Potsdam Proclamation. On October 25, 1945, the Chinese government recovered Taiwan and the Penghu Archipelago, resuming the exercise of sovereignty over Taiwan.

　　一九四九年十月一日，中华人民共和国中央人民政府宣告成立，取代中华民国政府成为全中国的唯一合法政府和在国际上的唯一合法代表，中华民国从此结束了它的历史地位。这是在同一国际法主体没有发生变化的情况下新政权取代旧政权，中国的主权和固有领土疆域并未由此而改变，中华人民共和国政府理所当然地完全享有和行使中国的主权，其中包括对台湾的主权。

　　On October 1, 1949, the Central People's Government of the PRC was proclaimed, replacing the government of the Republic of China to become the only legal government of the whole of China and its sole legal representative in the international arena, thereby bringing the historical status of the Republic of China to an end. This is a replacement of the old regime by a new one in a situation where the main bodies of the same international laws have not changed and China's sovereignty and inherent territory have not changed therefrom, and so the government of the PRC naturally should fully enjoy and exercise China's sovereignty, including its sovereignty over Taiwan.

　　国民党统治集团退踞台湾以来，虽然其政权继续使用“中华民国”和“中华民国政府”的名称，但它早已完全无权代表中国行使国家主权，实际上始终只是中国领土上的一个地方当局。

　　Since the KMT ruling clique retreated to Taiwan, although its regime has continued to use the designations "Republic of China" and "government of the Republic of China," it has long since completely forfeited its right to exercise state sovereignty on behalf of China and, in reality, has always remained only a local authority in Chinese territory.

　　一个中国原则的产生和基本涵义。中华人民共和国中央人民政府成立当天即向各国政府宣布：“本政府为代表中华人民共和国全国人民的唯一合法政府。凡愿遵守平等、互利及互相尊重领土主权等项原则的任何外国政府，本政府均愿与之建立外交关系。”随后又致电联合国，声明：国民党当局“已丧失了代表中国人民的任何法律的与事实的根据”，完全无权代表中国。外国承认中华人民共和国政府是代表全中国的唯一合法政府，与台湾当局断绝或不建立外交关系，是新中国与外国建交的原则。

　　The formulation of the One-China Principle and its basic meaning. On the day of its founding, the Central People's Government of the PRC declared to governments of all countries in the world, "This government is the sole legal government representing the entire people of the People's Republic of China. It is ready to establish diplomatic relations with all foreign governments that are willing to abide by the principles of equality, mutual benefit and mutual respect for each other's territorial integrity and sovereignty." Shortly afterwards, the Central People's Government telegraphed the United Nations, announcing that the KMT authorities had "lost all basis, both de jure and de facto, to represent the Chinese people," and therefore had no right to represent China at all. One principle governing New China's establishment of diplomatic relations with a foreign country is that it recognizes the government of the PRC as the sole legitimate government representing the whole of China, severs or refrain from establishing diplomatic relations with the Taiwan authorities.

　　中国政府的上述主张受到当时美国政府的阻挠。尽管一九五○年一月五日美国总统杜鲁门发表声明，表示美国及其他盟国承认一九四五年以来的四年中国对台湾岛行使主权，但是同年六月朝鲜战争爆发后，美国政府为了孤立、遏制中国，不仅派军队侵占台湾，而且抛出“台湾地位未定”等谬论，以后又逐步在国际社会策动“双重承认”，企图制造“两个中国”。对此，中国政府理所当然地予以坚决反对，主张和坚持世界上只有一个中国，台湾是中国的一部分，中华人民共和国政府是代表全中国的唯一合法政府。正是在中国与外国发展正常的外交关系中，在维护中国的主权和领土完整的斗争中，产生了一个中国原则。上述主张构成了一个中国原则的基本涵义，核心是维护中国的主权和领土完整。

　　These propositions of the Chinese government met with obstruction by the U.S. government. On January 5, 1950, the U.S. President Truman issued a statement, saying that the U.S. and other Allied countries recognized China's exercise of sovereignty over Taiwan Island in the four years since 1945. However, after the start of the Korean War in June 1950, to isolate and contain China the U.S. government not only sent troops to occupy Taiwan, but it also dished out such fallacies as "the status of Taiwan has yet to be determined" and later, step by step, lobbied for "dual recognition" among the international community in order to create "two Chinas." Natually, the Chinese government resolutely opposed this, insisting that there is only one-China in the world, Taiwan is a part of China and the government of the PRC is the sole legal government representing the whole of China. China has evolved the One-China Principle precisely in the course of the endeavor to develop normal diplomatic relations with other countries and the struggle to safeguard state sovereignty and territorial integrity. The above propositions constitute the basic meaning of the One-China Principle, the crucial point being to safeguard China's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

　　在一九四九年后的三四十年间，台湾当局虽然不承认中华人民共和国政府代表全中国的合法地位，但也坚持台湾是中国的一部分、只有一个中国的立场，反对制造“两个中国”和“台湾独立”。这说明，在一个相当长的时间里，两岸的中国人在只有一个中国、台湾是中国领土的一部分这一根本问题上具有共识。早在一九五八年十月，中国人民解放军在进行炮击金门的战斗时，毛泽东主席就向台湾当局公开指出：“世界上只有一个中国，没有两个中国。这一点，也是你们同意的，见之于你们领导人的文告。”一九七九年一月，全国人大常委会发表《告台湾同胞书》，指出“台湾当局一贯坚持一个中国的立场，反对台湾独立。这就是我们共同的立场，合作的基础。”

　　During the 30 or 40 years after 1949, although the Taiwan authorities did not recognize the legitimate status of the government of the PRC as the representative of the whole of China, they did insist that Taiwan is a part of China and that there is only one China, and opposed "two Chinas" and "Taiwan independence." This shows that for a long time there has been a common understanding among the Chinese on both sides of the Taiwan Straits on the fundamental question that there is only one China and Taiwan is a part of Chinese territory. As far back as October 1958, when the People's Liberation Army (PLA) was engaged in the battle to bombard Jinmen, Chairman Mao Zedong declared to the Taiwan authorities, "There is only one China, not two, in the world. You agree with us on this point, as indicated in your leaders' proclamations." In January 1979, the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPC) issued a Message to Taiwan Compatriots, pointing out that "the Taiwan authorities have always stood firm on the one China position and opposed the independence of Taiwan. This is our common stand and our basis for cooperation."

　　中国政府坚持一个中国原则的严正立场和合理主张，赢得了越来越多的国家和国际组织的理解和支持，一个中国原则逐步为国际社会所普遍接受。一九七一年十月，第二十六届联合国大会通过2758号决议，驱逐了台湾当局的代表，恢复了中华人民共和国政府在联合国的席位和一切合法权利。一九七二年九月，中日两国签署联合声明，宣布建立外交关系，日本承认中华人民共和国政府是中国的唯一合法政府，充分理解和尊重中国政府关于台湾是中华人民共和国领土不可分割的一部分的立场，并且坚持遵循《波茨坦公告》第八条规定的立场。一九七八年十二月，中美发表建交公报，美国“承认中华人民共和国政府是中国的唯一合法政府”；“承认中国的立场，即只有一个中国，台湾是中国的一部分”。目前，161个国家与中华人民共和国建立了外交关系，它们都承认一个中国原则，并且承诺在一个中国的框架内处理与台湾的关系。

　　The Chinese government's solemn and reasonable stand for the One-China Principle has gained the understanding and support of more and more countries and international organizations, and the One-China Principle has been gradually accepted by the international community at large. In October 1971, the United Nations General Assembly adopted at its 26th session Resolution 2758, which expelled the representatives of the Taiwan authorities and restored the seat and all the lawful rights of the government of the PRC in the United Nations. In September 1972, China and Japan signed a Joint Statement, announcing establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries, and that Japan recognizes the government of the PRC as the only legitimate government of China, fully understands and respects the Chinese government's position that Taiwan is an inalienable part of the territory of the PRC, and promises to adhere to the position as prescribed in Article 8 of the Potsdam Proclamation. In December 1978, China and the U.S. issued a Joint Communique on the establishment of diplomatic relations, in which the U.S. "recognizes the government of the People's Republic of China as the sole legal government of China" and "acknowledges the Chinese position that there is but one China and Taiwan is a part of China." Up to now, 161 countries have established diplomatic relations with the PRC; they all acknowledge the One-China Principle and promise to handle their relations with Taiwan within the one-China framework.

　　一个中国原则是实现和平统一的基础和前提

　　 The One-China Principle-the Basis and Prerequisite for Achieving Peaceful Reunification

    一个中国原则是中国政府对台政策的基石。经由邓小平同志的倡导，中国政府自一九七九年开始实行和平统一的方针，并逐步形成了“一国两制”的科学构想，在此基础上，确立了“和平统一、一国两制”的基本方针。这一基本方针和有关政策的要点是：争取和平统一，但是不承诺放弃使用武力；积极推动两岸人员往来和经济、文化等各项交流，早日实现两岸直接通邮、通航、通商；通过和平谈判实现统一，在一个中国原则下什么都可以谈；统一后实行“一国两制”，中国的主体(中国大陆)坚持社会主义制度，台湾保持原有的资本主义制度长期不变；统一后台湾实行高度自治，中央政府不派军队和行政人员驻台；解决台湾问题是中国的内政，应由中国人自己解决，不需借助外国力量。上述方针和政策，贯彻了坚持一个中国原则的基本立场和精神，也充分尊重了台湾同胞当家作主、管理台湾的愿望。江泽民主席在一九九五年一月发表发展两岸关系、推进祖国和平统一进程的八项主张时，明确指出：“坚持一个中国的原则，是实现和平统一的基础和前提。”

　　The One-China Principle is the foundation stone for the Chinese government's policy on Taiwan.  On Comrade Deng Xiaoping's initiative, the Chinese government has, since 1979, adopted the policy of peaceful reunification and gradually evolved the scientific concept of "one country, two systems." On this basis, China established the basic principle of "peaceful reunification, and one country, two systems." The key points of this basic principle and the relevant policies are: China will do its best to achieve peaceful reunification, but will not commit itself to rule out the use of force; will actively promote people-to-people contacts and economic and cultural exchanges between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits, and start direct trade, postal, air and shipping services as soon as possible; achieve reunification through peaceful negotiations and, on the premise of the One-China Principle, any matter can be negotiated. After reunification, the policy of "one country, two systems" will be practiced, with the main body of China (China mainland) continuing with its socialist system, and Taiwan maintaining its capitalist system for a long period of time to come. After reunification, Taiwan will enjoy a high degree of autonomy, and the Central Government will not send troops or administrative personnel to be stationed in Taiwan. Resolution of the Taiwan issue is an internal affair of China, which should be achieved by the Chinese themselves, and there is no call for aid by foreign forces. The afore-mentioned principles and policies embody the basic stand and spirit of adhering to the One-China Principle, and fully respect Taiwan compatriots' wish to govern and administer Taiwan by themselves. In January 1995, President Jiang Zemin put forward eight propositions on the development of relations between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits and the promotion of peaceful reunification of China, explicitly pointing out: "Adhering to the One-China Principle is the basis and prerequisite for peaceful reunification."

    只有坚持一个中国原则才能实现和平统一。台湾问题是中国内战遗留下来的问题。迄今，两岸敌对状态并未正式结束。为了维护中国的主权和领土完整，为了实现两岸统一，中国政府有权采用任何必要的手段。采用和平的方式，有利于两岸社会的共同发展，有利于两岸同胞感情的融合和团结，是最好的方式。中国政府于一九七九年宣布实行和平统一的方针时，是基于一个前提，即当时的台湾当局坚持世界上只有一个中国、台湾是中国的一部分。同时，中国政府考虑到长期支持台湾当局的美国政府承认了世界上只有一个中国、台湾是中国的一部分、中华人民共和国政府是中国的唯一合法政府，这也有利于用和平的方式解决台湾问题。中国政府在实行和平统一方针的同时始终表明，以何种方式解决台湾问题是中国的内政，并无义务承诺放弃使用武力。不承诺放弃使用武力，决不是针对台湾同胞的，而是针对制造“台湾独立”的图谋和干涉中国统一的外国势力，是为争取实现和平统一提供必要的保障。采用武力的方式，将是最后不得已而被迫作出的选择。

　　Only by adhering to the One-China Principle can peaceful reunification be achieved. The Taiwan issue is one left over by the Chinese civil war. As yet, the state of hostility between the two sides of the Straits has not formally ended. To safeguard China's sovereignty and territorial integrity and realize the reunification of the two sides of the Straits, the Chinese government has the right to resort to any necessary means. Peaceful means would be favorable to the common development of the societies on both sides of the Straits, and to the harmony and unity of the compatriots across the Straits. Peaceful means is therefore the best means. The Chinese government's declaration in 1979 on implementing the principle of peaceful reunification was based on the premise that the Taiwan authorities at that time upheld the principle that there is only one China in the world and Taiwan is a part of China. Meanwhile, the Chinese government took into account the fact that the U.S. government, which for many years had supported the Taiwan authorities, had accepted that there is only one China in the world, Taiwan is a part of China and the government of the PRC is the only legal government of China, and saw this acknowledgement as being beneficial to the peaceful resolution of the Taiwan issue. While carrying out the policy of peaceful reunification, the Chinese government always makes it clear that the means used to solve the Taiwan issue is a matter of China's internal affairs, and China is under no obligation to commit itself to rule out the use of force. This is by no means directed against Taiwan compatriots, but against the scheme to create an "independent Taiwan" and against the foreign forces interfering with the reunification of China, and is intended as a necessary safeguard for the striving for peaceful reunification. Resort to force would only be the last choice made under compelled circumstances.

　　对台湾而言，坚持一个中国原则，标志着承认中国的主权和领土不可分割，这就使两岸双方有了共同的基础和前提，可以通过平等协商，找到解决双方政治分歧的办法，实现和平统一。如果否认一个中国原则，图谋将台湾从中国领土中分割出去，那就使和平统一的前提和基础不复存在。

　　As for Taiwan, upholding the principle of one China indicates that it acknowledges that China's sovereignty and territory are inalienable. In this way, both sides of the Taiwan Straits will have a common basis and premise and may find ways to solve their political differences and realize peaceful reunification through consultation on an equal footing. If Taiwan denies the One-China Principle and tries to separate Taiwan from the territory of China, the premise and basis for peaceful reunification will cease to exist.

　　对美国而言，承诺奉行一个中国政策，就要切实执行中美两国政府之间的三个公报和美方的一系列承诺，就应当只与台湾保持文化、商务和其他非官方的关系，反对所谓“台湾独立”、“两个中国”、“一中一台”，不阻挠中国的统一。反之，就破坏了中国政府争取和平统一的外部条件。

　　As for the United States, if it promises to follow a one-China policy, it should earnestly implement the three communiques between the Chinese and U.S. governments and fulfil the series of promises it has made. It should maintain only cultural, commercial and other non-governmental relations with Taiwan; oppose "Taiwan independence," "two Chinas" or "one China, one Taiwan" and not to stand in the way of the reunification of China. Acting otherwise will destroy the external conditions necessary for the Chinese government to strive for peaceful reunification.

　　对于亚太地区和世界其他地区的国家而言，台湾海峡局势一直与亚太地区的安定密切相关。有关各国坚持一个中国政策，有利于维护亚太地区的和平与稳定，也有利于中国同各国发展友好关系，符合亚太地区乃至世界各国的利益。

　　As for countries in the Asia-Pacific region and other regions in the world, the situation across the Taiwan Straits has always been closely linked with the stability of the Asia-Pacific region. Adherence to the policy of one China by countries concerned will be beneficial to peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region and favorable for China to develop friendly relations with other countries, and therefore conforms to the interests of the Asia-Pacific region and other countries in the world.

    中国政府积极地真诚地努力争取实现和平统一。为了争取和平统一，中国政府一再呼吁在一个中国原则基础上举行两岸平等谈判。充分考虑到台湾的政治现实，为了照顾台湾当局关于平等谈判地位的要求，我们先后提出了举行中国共产党和中国国民党两党对等谈判、两党谈判可以吸收台湾各党派团体有代表性的人士参加等主张，而始终不提“中央与地方谈判”。中国政府还提出，可先从进行包括政治对话在内的对话开始，逐步过渡到政治谈判的程序性商谈，解决正式谈判的名义、议题、方式等问题，进而展开政治谈判。政治谈判可以分步骤进行，第一步，先就在一个中国原则下正式结束两岸敌对状态进行谈判，并达成协议，共同维护中国的主权和领土完整，并对今后两岸关系发展进行规划。一九九八年一月，为寻求和扩大两岸关系的政治基础，中国政府向台湾方面明确提出，在统一之前，在处理两岸关系事务中，特别是在两岸谈判中，坚持一个中国原则，也就是坚持世界上只有一个中国，台湾是中国的一部分，中国的主权和领土完整不容分割。中国政府希望，在一个中国原则基础上，双方平等协商，共议统一。

　　The Chinese government is actively and sincerely striving for peaceful reunification.  To achieve peaceful reunification, the Chinese government has appealed time and again for cross-Straits negotiations on the basis of equality and the One-China Principle. Taking Taiwan's political reality into full account and out of consideration for the Taiwan authorities' request for the negotiations to be held on an equal footing, we have put forward one proposal after another, such as that the negotiations should be held between the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Chinese KMT on a reciprocal basis and that the talks between the two parties may include representatives from all parties and mass organizations of Taiwan, and we have never spoken of negotiations between the "central and local authorities." The Chinese government has also proposed that dialogues may start first, including political dialogues, which may gradually move on to procedural consultations for political talks to solve the name, the topics for discussion and the forms of official talks before political talks are held. Political talks may be carried out step by step. First, negotiations should be held and an agreement reached on an official end to the state of hostility between the two sides under the principle of one China so as to jointly safeguard China's sovereignty and territorial integrity and work out plans for the development of the future inter-Straits relations. In January 1998, to seek and expand the political basis for relations between the two sides, the Chinese government explicitly proposed to the Taiwan side that before the realization of reunification and in handling affairs concerning inter-Straits relations, especially during the talks between the two sides, the One-China Principle should be upheld, namely that there is only one China in the world, Taiwan is a part of China and China's sovereignty and territorial integrity is not to be separated. The Chinese government hopes that on the basis of the One-China Principle, the two sides will hold consultations on an equal footing and discuss national reunification together.

　　为争取和平统一，中国政府采取了一系列积极的政策和措施，全面推动两岸关系发展。自一九八七年底两岸隔绝状态被打破后至一九九九年底，到中国大陆从事探亲、旅游、交流的台湾同胞已达1600万人次；两岸间接贸易总额超过1600亿美元，台商在中国大陆投资的协议金额及实际到位金额分别超过了440亿美元与240亿美元；两岸互通邮政、电信取得了很大进展；两岸海上、空中通航也取得了局部进展。全国人民代表大会及其常务委员会、国务院、地方政府制定了一系列法律、法规，依法保障台湾同胞的正当权益。为了通过商谈妥善解决两岸同胞交往中所衍生的具体问题，一九九二年十一月，海峡两岸关系协会与台湾的海峡交流基金会达成在事务性商谈中各自以口头方式表述“海峡两岸均坚持一个中国原则”的共识，在此基础上，两会领导人于一九九三年四月成功举行了“汪辜会谈”，并签署了几项涉及保护两岸同胞正当权益的协议。一九九八年十月，两会领导人在上海会晤，开启了两岸政治对话。两会商谈是在平等的地位上进行的。实践证明，在一个中国原则的基础上，完全可以找到两岸平等谈判的适当方式。香港、澳门回归中国以来，港台之间、澳台之间原有的各种民间往来与交流，在一个中国原则的基础上继续保持和发展。

　　To strive for peaceful reunification, the Chinese government has adopted a series of positive policies and measures to promote the comprehensive development of cross-Straits relations. From the end of 1987, when the state of isolation between the two sides was terminated, to the end of 1999, the number of Taiwan compatriots coming to the mainland of China for visiting their relatives, sightseeing or exchanges reached 16 million by turnstile count. The total indirect trade volume between the two sides of the Straits has exceeded US$ 160 billion; the agreed capital to be invested by Taiwan business people in the mainland has exceeded US$ 44 billion, of which US$ 24 billion has been actually used. Great progress has been made in the exchange of mail and telecommunications across the Straits; and some progress has been made in the exchange of air and shipping services too. The NPC and its Standing Committee, the State Council, and local governments have worked out a sequence of laws and regulations to safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of Taiwan compatriots. To properly solve the concrete issues arising from the people-to-people contacts between the two sides through consultations, in November 1992 the mainland's Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits and Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation reached the common understanding during talks on routine affairs that each of the two organizations should express verbally that "both sides of the Taiwan Straits adhere to the One-China Principle." On this basis, the leaders of these two organizations successfully held the "Wang Daohan-Koo Chen-fu talks" and signed several agreements on protecting the legitimate rights and interests of the compatriots on both sides of the Taiwan Straits in April 1993. In October 1998, the leaders of the two organizations met in Shanghai, starting political dialogue across the Straits. The talks between the two organizations were carried out on an equal footing. Practice has proved that on the basis of the One-China Principle, it is entirely possible to find a proper way for holding talks, based on equality, between the two sides. Since Hong Kong and Macao's return to China, people-to-people contacts and exchanges between Hong Kong and Taiwan and between Macao and Taiwan have continued and developed on the basis of the One-China Principle.    

　　中国政府坚决捍卫一个中国原则

　　 The Chinese Government-Staunch Champion for the One-China Principle

    台湾分裂势力蓄意破坏一个中国原则。一九八八年，李登辉继任为台湾当局的领导人。当时他多次公开表示，台湾当局的基本政策就是“只有一个中国而没有两个中国的政策”；“我们一贯主张中国应该统一，并坚持‘一个中国’的原则”。

　　Separatist forces in Taiwan are bent on violating the One-China Principle.  In 1988, after Lee Teng-hui became the leader of the Taiwan authorities, he publicly stated time and again that the basic policy of the Taiwan authorities was that "there is only one China, not two," and "we have always maintained that China should be reunited, and we adhere to the principle of 'one China.'"

　　但是，从九十年代初开始，李登辉逐步背离一个中国原则，相继鼓吹“两个政府”、“两个对等政治实体”、“台湾已经是个主权独立的国家”、“现阶段是‘中华民国在台湾’与‘中华人民共和国在大陆’”，而且自食其言，说他“始终没有讲过一个中国”。李登辉还纵容、扶持主张所谓“台湾独立”的分裂势力及其活动，使“台独”势力迅速发展、“台独”思潮蔓延。在李登辉主导下，台湾当局采取了一系列实际的分裂步骤。在台湾政权体制方面，力图通过所谓的“宪政改革”将台湾改造成一个“独立的政治实体”，以适应制造“两个中国”的需要。在对外关系方面，不遗余力地进行以制造“两个中国”为目的的“拓展国际生存空间”活动。一九九三年以来，连续七年推动所谓“参与联合国”的活动。在军事方面，大量向外国购买先进武器，谋求加入战区导弹防御系统，企图变相地与美、日建立某种形式的军事同盟。在思想文化方面，图谋抹杀台湾同胞、特别是年轻一代的中国人意识和对祖国的认同，挑起台湾同胞对祖国的误解和疏离感，割断两岸同胞的思想和文化纽带。

　　However, since the early 1990s, Lee Teng-hui has gradually deviated from the One-China Principle, trumpeting "two governments," "two reciprocal political entities," "Taiwan is already a state with independent sovereignty," and "At the present stage the Republic of China is on Taiwan and the People's Republic of China is on the mainland." Moreover, he went back on his words, saying that "I have never said that there is only one China." In addition, he has connived at and provided support for the separatists who advocate "Taiwan independence" and their activities, thus helping the rapid development of the "Taiwan independence" forces and the spread of the "Taiwan independence" ideology. Under the direction of Lee Teng-hui, the Taiwan authorities have adopted a series of measures toward actual separation. In matters of Taiwan's form of government, the Taiwan authorities are seeking to transform Taiwan into an "independent political entity" through a "constitutional reform," so as to suit the needs of creating "two Chinas." In foreign relations, the Taiwan authorities have spared no effort to carry out the activities for "expanding the international space of survival," with the aim of creating "two Chinas." Since 1993, for seven years running, the Taiwan authorities have maneuvered for participation in the United Nations. In military affairs, the Taiwan authorities have bought large quantities of advanced weapons from foreign countries and sought to join the Theater Missile Defense System (TMDS), in an attempt to establish a military alliance of a disguised form with the United States and Japan. In ideology and culture, the Taiwan authorities have endeavored to obliterate the Chinese awareness of Taiwan compatriots, especially young people, and their identification with the motherland, in order to create misunderstanding of the motherland among Taiwan compatriots and estrange them from her, thus cutting off the ideological and cultural ties between the compatriots on both sides of the Taiwan Straits.

　　一九九九年以来，李登辉的分裂活动进一步发展。五月，他出版《台湾的主张》一书，鼓吹要把中国分成七块各自享有“充分自主权”的区域。七月九日，他公然将两岸关系歪曲为“国家与国家，至少是特殊的国与国的关系”，企图从根本上改变台湾是中国一部分的地位，破坏两岸关系、特别是两岸政治对话与谈判的基础，破坏两岸和平统一的基础。李登辉已经成为台湾分裂势力的总代表，是台湾海峡安定局面的破坏者，是中美关系发展的绊脚石，也是亚太地区和平与稳定的麻烦制造者。

　　Since 1999, Lee Teng-hui has stepped up his separatist activities. In May, he published the bookThe Road to Democracy, which advocates the division of China into seven regions, each enjoying "full autonomy." On July 9, he went so far as to publicly distort the inter-Straits relations as "state-to-state relations, or at least special state-to-state relations," in an attempt to fundamentally change the status of Taiwan as a part of China, sabotage the relations between both sides of the Taiwan Straits, especially the basis for cross-Straits political dialogues and negotiations, and wreck the foundation for peaceful reunification. Lee Teng-hui has become the general representative of Taiwan's separatist forces, a saboteur of the stability of the Taiwan Straits, a stumbling-block preventing the development of relations between China and the United States, and a troublemaker for the peace and stability of the Asia-Pacific region.

    中国政府坚决捍卫一个中国原则。对于以李登辉为代表的台湾分裂势力的种种分裂活动，中国政府和人民一直保持着高度的警惕，并进行了坚决的斗争。

　　The Chinese government firmly defends the One-China Principle.  The Chinese government and people have always maintained sharp vigilance and fought resolutely against the secessionist activities of the Taiwan separatists, represented by Lee Teng-hui.

　　一九九五年六月李登辉以所谓“私人”名义访问美国后，中国政府果断地开展了反分裂、反“台独”的斗争，并对美国政府公然允许李登辉访美、违背美国在中美三个联合公报中所作的承诺、严重损害中国主权的行为，提出了强烈的抗议，进行了严正的交涉。这场斗争显示了中国政府和人民捍卫国家主权和领土完整的坚强决心和能力，产生了重大和深远的影响。台湾同胞进一步认识到“台独”的严重危害。李登辉在国际上进行分裂活动受到沉重打击。部分“台独”势力被迫放弃了某些极端的分裂主张。国际社会进一步注意到坚持一个中国政策的必要性，美国政府还明确承诺不支持“台湾独立”、不支持“两个中国”或“一中一台”、不支持台湾加入任何必须由主权国家参加的国际组织。

　　After Lee Teng-hui's "private" visit to the United States in June 1995, the Chinese government has waged a resolute struggle against separation and against "Taiwan independence," and made strong protests and representations to the U.S. government for openly allowing Lee Teng-hui to visit the U.S., violating its promises made in the three Sino-U.S. joint communiques, and seriously prejudicing China's sovereignty. This struggle has shown the Chinese government and people's firm resolve and ability to safeguard state sovereignty and territorial integrity, and exerted an important and far-reaching influence. Compatriots in Taiwan have further realized the serious harm "Taiwan independence" can cause. Lee Teng-hui has received a heavy blow for his separatist activities in the international community, so that some of the "Taiwan independence" protagonists have had to abandon certain extremist propositions aimed at division. The international community has further realized the necessity of upholding a one-China policy. The U.S. government has explicitly undertaken not to support "Taiwan independence," not to support "two Chinas" or "one China, one Taiwan," and not to support Taiwan joining any international organization whose membership is restricted to sovereign states.

　　李登辉抛出“两国论”后，中国政府和人民进行了更加坚决的斗争。针对台湾分裂势力企图通过所谓“法律”形式落实“两国论”的活动，中国政府有关部门明确指出，这是一个更加严重和危险的分裂步骤，是对和平统一的极大挑衅。如果这一图谋得逞，中国和平统一将变得不可能。这场斗争形成了海内外中国人同声谴责“两国论”的强大声势。世界上大多数国家重申坚持一个中国政策。美国政府也重申坚持一个中国政策和对台湾“三不支持”的承诺。台湾当局被迫表示不会依照“两国论”修改所谓“宪法”、“法律”。

　　The Chinese government and people have fought more unremittingly after Lee Teng-hui cooked up his "two states" theory. The relevant department of the Chinese government has clearly stated that the attempt of the Taiwan separatists to implement the "two states" theory in "legal" form was an even more serious and dangerous step toward division and a grave provocation against peaceful reunification. Were the attempt to succeed, it would be impossible for China to achieve peaceful reunification. The struggle against this attempt has grown in momentum with Chinese both at home and abroad condemning the "two states" theory with one voice. Most countries in the world have reaffirmed their position of upholding the One-China Policy. The U.S. government has also reasserted its adherence to the One-China Policy and its commitment to the "Three Non-supports" for Taiwan. Finally, the Taiwan authorities have been compelled to announce that they will not amend their "constitution" and "laws" according to the "two states" theory.

　　但是，台湾分裂势力仍在企图以所谓“制宪”、“修宪”、“解释宪法”或“立法”等多种形式，用所谓“法律”形式实现在“中华民国”名义下把台湾从中国分割出去的图谋。特别值得警惕的是，台湾分裂势力一贯图谋破坏中美关系，挑起中美冲突和对抗，以便实现他们的分裂图谋。

　　Nevertheless, separatists in Taiwan are still attempting to detach Taiwan "de jure"from China in the name of the "Republic of China" by various forms, including "formulating a new constitution," "amending the constitution," and "explaining the constitution" or through "legislation." Special vigilance should be maintained to the fact that the Taiwan separatists are continually scheming to disrupt the Sino-U.S. relations and provoke conflicts and confrontation between the two nations to achieve their aim of dividing China.

　　事实证明，台湾海峡局势仍然存在着严重的危机。为了维护包括台湾同胞在内的全中国人民的利益，也为了维护亚太地区的和平与发展，中国政府仍然坚持“和平统一、一国两制”方针不变，仍然坚持江泽民主席提出的发展两岸关系、推进祖国和平统一进程的八项主张不变，仍然尽一切可能争取和平统一。但是，如果出现台湾被以任何名义从中国分割出去的重大事变，如果出现外国侵占台湾，如果台湾当局无限期地拒绝通过谈判和平解决两岸统一问题，中国政府只能被迫采取一切可能的断然措施、包括使用武力，来维护中国的主权和领土完整，完成中国的统一大业。中国政府和人民完全有决心、有能力维护国家主权和领土完整，决不容忍、决不姑息、决不坐视任何分裂中国的图谋得逞，任何分裂图谋都是注定要失败的。

　　Facts prove that a serious crisis still exists in the situation of the Taiwan Straits. To safeguard the interests of the entire Chinese people including compatriots in Taiwan and maintain the peace and development of the Asia-Pacific region, the Chinese government remains firm in adhering to "peaceful reunification" and "one country, two systems"; upholding the eight propositions put forward by President Jiang Zemin for the development of cross-Straits relations and the acceleration of the peaceful reunification of China; and doing its utmost to achieve the objective of peaceful reunification. However, if a grave turn of events occurs leading to the separation of Taiwan from China in any name, or if Taiwan is invaded and occupied by foreign countries, or if the Taiwan authorities refuse, sine die, the peaceful settlement of cross-Straits reunification through negotiations, then the Chinese government will only be forced to adopt all drastic measures possible, including the use of force, to safeguard China's sovereignty and territorial integrity and fulfill the great cause of reunification. The Chinese government and people absolutely have the determination and ability to safeguard China's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and will never tolerate, condone or remain indifferent to the realization of any scheme to divide China. Any such scheme is doomed to failure.
    
　　两岸关系中涉及一个中国原则的若干问题

　　 Several Questions Involving The One-China Principle in the Cross-Straits Relations

中国领土和主权没有分裂，海峡两岸并非两个国家。
Chinese territory and sovereignty has not been split, and the two sides of the Straits are not two states. 
台湾当局支撑其制造“两个中国”的主张，包括李登辉提出的“两国论”的所谓理由无非是：一九四九年以后海峡两岸已经分裂分治且互不隶属，中华人民共和国政府从未统治过台湾，一九九一年以后台湾也已产生了与中国大陆没有关系的政权体制。这些理由是根本不能成立的，也绝对不能得出台湾可以“中华民国”的名义自立为一个国家和海峡两岸已经分裂为两个国家的结论。第一，国家主权不可分割。领土是国家行使主权的空间。在一个国家的领土上，只能有一个代表国家行使主权的中央政府。如前所述，台湾是中国领土不可分割的一部分，一九四九年中华人民共和国政府取代中华民国政府成为全中国的唯一合法政府，已经享有和行使包括台湾在内的全中国的主权。虽然海峡两岸尚未统一，但是台湾是中国领土一部分的地位从未改变，由此，中国拥有对台湾的主权也从未改变。第二，国际社会承认只有一个中国、台湾是中国的一部分、中华人民共和国政府是中国的唯一合法政府。第三，台湾问题长期得不到解决，主要是外国势力干涉和台湾分裂势力阻挠的结果。海峡两岸尚未统一，这种不正常状态的长期存在，并没有赋予台湾在国际法上的地位和权利，也不能改变台湾是中国一部分的法律地位。目前的问题是台湾分裂势力和某些外国反华势力要改变这种状况，而这正是中国政府和人民坚决反对的。
The Taiwan authorities support their position on "two Chinas," including the "two states" theory proposed by Lee Teng-hui, with the following arguments: Since 1949, the territories on either side of the Straits have been divided and governed separately, with neither side having jurisdiction over the other; the government of the PRC has never ruled Taiwan; and since 1991 Taiwan has witnessed a form of government that has nothing to do with that of the China mainland. These arguments are absolutely untenable, and can never lead to the conclusion that Taiwan may declare itself a state under the name of the "Republic of China," or that the two sides of the Straits have been divided into two states. Firstly, state sovereignty is inseparable. The territory is the space in which a state exercises its sovereignty. In the territory of a country there can only be a central government exercising sovereignty on behalf of the state. As we have already said, Taiwan is an inalienable part of Chinese territory and, after replacing the government of the Republic of China in 1949, the government of the PRC has become the sole legal government of China, enjoying and exercising sovereignty over the whole of China, including Taiwan. Although the two sides of the Straits have not been reunified, Taiwan's status as a part of Chinese territory has never changed, neither, therefore, has China's sovereignty over Taiwan ever changed. Secondly, the international community recognizes that there is only one China, that Taiwan is a part of China, and that the government of the PRC is the sole legal government of China. Thirdly, the reason that the Taiwan question has not been settled for such a long period of time is mainly due to the intervention of foreign forces and the obstruction of the separatist forces in Taiwan. Although the two sides of the Straits remain to be reunified, the long-term existence of this abnormal situation has not imbued Taiwan with a status and rights in international law, nor can it change the legal status of Taiwan as a part of China. The problem now is that the separatists in Taiwan and some foreign anti-China forces seek to change this state of affairs, and it is this that the Chinese government and people are firmly against.

坚决反对以公民投票方式改变台湾是中国一部分的地位。
We firmly oppose changing Taiwan's status as a part of China by referendum. 
台湾分裂势力以“主权在民”为借口，企图以公民投票方式改变台湾是中国一部分的地位，这是徒劳的。
The Taiwan separatists' attempt to change Taiwan's status as a part of China by referendum on the pretext that "sovereignty belongs to the people" is futile. 
首先，台湾是中国领土一部分的法律地位，无论在国内法还是在国际法上，都已经是明确的，不存在用公民投票方式决定是否应自决的前提。其次，“主权在民”是指主权属于一个国家的全体人民，而不是指属于某一部分或某一地区的人民。对台湾的主权，属于包括台湾同胞在内的全中国人民，而不属于台湾一部分人。第三，历史上台湾从未曾成为一个国家；一九四五年以后，台湾既不是外国的殖民地，又不处于外国占领之下，不存在行使民族自决权的问题。总之，自一九四五年中国收复台湾之后，就根本不存在就改变台湾是中国一部分的地位举行公民投票的问题。台湾的前途只有一条，就是走向与祖国大陆的统一，而决不能走向分裂。任何人以所谓公民投票的方式把台湾从中国分割出去，其结果必将把台湾人民引向灾难。
Firstly, under both domestic and international laws Taiwan's legal status as a part of Chinese territory is unequivocal, and there can be no premise for using referendum to decide any matter of self-determination. Secondly, the phrase "sovereignty belongs to the people" refers to all the people of a state, and not certain people or the people of a certain area. The sovereignty over Taiwan belongs to all the Chinese people including Taiwan compatriots, and not to some of the people in Taiwan. Thirdly, at no time in history has Taiwan been a state in its own right, and since 1945 Taiwan has not been a foreign colony, nor has it been under foreign occupation. The issue of national self- determination, therefore, does not exist. In short, from the time that China recovered Taiwan in 1945, there has been no question at all of changing Taiwan's status as a part of China by holding a referendum. The only future for Taiwan is reunification with the China mainland, and certainly not separation. Any attempt to separate Taiwan from China through so-called referendum would only lead the Taiwan people to disaster.

    “两德模式”不能用于解决台湾问题。台湾有些人主张用第二次世界大战后德国被分裂为两个国家后又重新统一的所谓“两德模式”来处理两岸关系。这是对历史和现实的误解。战后德国的分裂和两岸暂时分离是两个不同性质的问题。主要有三点不同：第一，两者形成的原因、性质不同。一九四五年德国在二战中战败，被美、英、法、苏四个战胜国依据《鉴于德国失败和接管最高政府权力的声明》及其后的波茨坦协议，分区占领。冷战开始后，德国统一问题成为美苏两国在欧洲对抗的一个焦点，在美英法占领区和苏联占领区分别相继成立了德意志联邦共和国和德意志民主共和国，德国被分裂为两个国家。显然，德国问题完全是由外部因素造成的。而台湾问题则是中国内战遗留的问题，是内政问题。第二，两者在国际法上的地位不同。德国的分裂，为二战期间和战后一系列国际条约所规定。而台湾问题，则有《开罗宣言》、《波茨坦公告》等国际条约关于日本必须将窃取于中国的台湾归还中国的规定。第三，两者存在的实际状况不同。在美苏两国对抗的背景下，两个德国都分别驻有外国军队，被迫相互承认和在国际社会并存。而中国政府始终坚持一个中国原则，李登辉上台前的台湾当局和李登辉上台初期也承认一个中国，反对“两个中国”；一个中国原则也被国际社会所普遍接受。因而，德国问题与台湾问题不能相提并论，更不能照搬“两德模式”解决台湾问题。

　　The "two German states formula" cannot be applied to the settlement of the Taiwan issue. Some people in Taiwan have suggested that cross-Straits relations should be dealt with according to the "two German states formula," since Germany was divided into two states after the Second World War, and was later reunified. This proposal shows a misunderstanding of history and reality. The division of Germany after the war and the temporary division between the two sides of the Straits are questions of a different nature, the difference lying mainly in three aspects. The first is the reasons for, and the nature of, the division. After its defeat in the Second World War in 1945, Germany was divided into zones occupied separately by the four victorious nations of the United States, Britain, France and the Soviet Union according to a declaration on the defeat of Germany and the assumption of supreme authority and the subsequent Potsdam Agreement. The reunification of Germany became a focus of the confrontation in Europe between the United States and the Soviet Union during the cold war. The Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic were established in the zones occupied by the U.S., Britain and France, and that occupied by the Soviet Union. Thus Germany was divided into two states. Obviously, the German question arose entirely from external factors, while the Taiwan issue, left over by China's civil war, is a matter of China's internal affairs. The second aspect is the difference in status between the two under international law. Germany was divided according to a series of international treaties during and after the Second World War, while the Taiwan question involves provisions of the Cairo Declaration, the Potsdam Proclamation and other international treaties, stating that Japan must return Taiwan, which it had stolen from China, to the Chinese. The third is the difference between the two in their actual conditions of existence. Against the backdrop of the confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, the two German states had foreign troops stationing in their territories and so were compelled to recognize each other and co-exist in the international community. The Chinese government has always persisted in the principle of one China. Before Lee Teng-hui assumed power, and during his early days in office, the Taiwan authorities recognized only one China and opposed "two Chinas," and the One-China Principle has also been widely accepted by the international community. For these reasons, the Taiwan issue and the German issue cannot be placed in the same category, nor can the "two German states formula" be copied to settle the Taiwan question.

　　在一个中国原则下，什么问题都可以谈。中国政府主张两岸谈判最终目的是实现和平统一；主张以一个中国原则为谈判基础，是为了保证实现谈判的目的。而“台湾独立”、“两个中国”、“两国论”违背了一个中国原则，不是谈统一，而是谈分裂，当然不可能被中国政府接受。只要在一个中国的框架内，什么问题都可以谈，包括台湾方面关心的各种问题。中国政府相信，台湾在国际上与其身份相适应的经济的、文化的、社会的对外活动空间，台湾当局的政治地位等等，都可以在这个框架内，通过政治谈判，最终在和平统一的过程中得到解决。

　　Any question can be discussed under the One-China Principle. The Chinese government advocates that the final purpose of cross-Straits negotiations is to achieve peaceful reunification; and that to achieve this purpose, talks should be held based on the principle of one China. However, the proposals for "Taiwan independence," "two Chinas" and "two states," aiming for separation instead of reunification, violate the One-China Principle, and are naturally unacceptable to the Chinese government. Provided that it is within the framework of one China, any question can be discussed, including the various issues that are of concern to the Taiwan side. The Chinese government believes that Taiwan's international space for economic, cultural and social activities compatible with its status, the political status of the Taiwan authorities and other questions can be finally settled in the process of peaceful reunification through political negotiations within this framework.
 
　　所谓“民主和制度之争”是阻挠中国统一的借口。近些年来，台湾当局一再声称，“大陆的民主化是中国再统一的关键”、“两岸问题的真正本质是制度竞赛”。这是拖延和抗拒统一的借口，是欺骗台湾同胞和国际舆论的伎俩。中国共产党和中国政府不断为实现社会主义民主的理想而奋斗。按照“一国两制”的方式实现和平统一，允许海峡两岸两种社会制度同时存在，互不强加于对方，最能体现两岸同胞的意愿，这本身就是民主的。两岸不同的社会制度，不应构成和平统一的障碍。而且，中国政府注意到台湾与香港、澳门的不同特点，实现两岸和平统一之后，在台湾实行“一国两制”的内容，可以比香港、澳门更为宽松。台湾当局企图以“民主和制度之争”阻挠统一，妄想居住在中国大陆的十二亿多人实行台湾的政治、经济制度，是毫无道理的，也是不民主的。“要民主”不应成为“不要统一”的理由。两岸双方在这个问题上分歧的实质，绝不是要不要民主之争、实行哪种制度之争，而是要统一还是要分裂之争。

　　The so-called controversy about democracy and system is an excuse for obstructing the reunification of China. In recent years the Taiwan authorities have repeatedly declared that "democratization on the China mainland is the key to the reunification of China" and that "the real essence of the cross-Straits issue is a contest between systems." This is an excuse for postponing and resisting reunification, as well as a scheme to deceive compatriots in Taiwan and world opinion. The CPC and the Chinese government have consistently striven to achieve socialist democracy. To achieve peaceful reunification in the form of "one country, two systems," and to allow the two different social systems on both sides of the Straits to coexist without imposing them on one or the other-this is best able to embody the wishes of compatriots on both sides of the Straits and is itself democratic. The different social systems across the Straits, therefore, should not constitute any barrier to peaceful reunification. Moreover, the Chinese government acknowledges the differences between Taiwan on the one hand and Hong Kong and Macao on the other and, after peaceful reunification, is prepared to apply a looser form of the "one country, two systems" policy in Taiwan than in Hong Kong and Macao. It is totally unreasonable and undemocratic for the Taiwan authorities to seek to obstruct reunification on the pretext of the "controversy about democracy and system" and to force the more than 1.2 billion people living on the China mainland to practice the political and economic systems in Taiwan. The demand for democracy should not be used as a reason for refusing reunification. The essence of the difference between the two sides of the Straits on this question lies by no means in the controversy over whether to practice democracy or in the controversy over what system to practice, but rather a controversy over the choice between reunification and separation. 
    

　　在国际社会中坚持一个中国原则的若干问题

　　 Several Questions Involving Adherence to the One-China Principle in the International Community

中国政府对于国际社会普遍奉行一个中国政策表示赞赏。
The Chinese government has expressed its appreciation to the international community for widely pursuing a one-China policy. 
我们于一九九三年八月发表的《台湾问题与中国的统一》白皮书，在第五部分“国际事务中涉及台湾的几个问题”中，阐述了在有关与中国建交国同台湾的关系、国际组织与台湾的关系、与中国建交国同台湾通航、与中国建交国向台湾出售武器等问题上的立场和政策。在此，谨重申有关立场和政策。
In August 1993, we published the white paperThe Taiwan Question and Reunification of China. In Chapter V of this document, "Several Questions Involving Taiwan in International Relations," we explained our position and policy on a number of issues, including relations between Taiwan and countries maintaining diplomatic ties with China, relations between international organizations and Taiwan, aviation services between Taiwan and countries having diplomatic relations with China, and arms sales to Taiwan by countries having diplomatic relations with China. Here, we would like to reaffirm our related position and policy.

台湾无权参加联合国及其他只有主权国家参加的国际组织。
Taiwan is ineligible for membership of the United Nations and other international organizations whose membership is confined to sovereign states.

联合国是由主权国家组成的政府间国际组织。
The United Nations is an inter-governmental international organization composed of sovereign states.
中华人民共和国政府在联合国的合法权利恢复后，联合国组织中的中国代表权问题已经获得彻底解决，根本不存在台湾当局加入联合国的问题。
After the restoration of the lawful rights of the PRC in the United Nations, the issue of China's representation in the UNO was resolved once and for all and Taiwan's re-entry became totally out of the question. 
台湾当局声称联合国2758号决议只解决了“中国代表权问题”，没有解决“台湾的代表权问题”，要求“参与联合国”。这是制造“两个中国”、“一中一台”的分裂行径，是绝对不能允许的。联合国的所有成员国，都应遵守《联合国宪章》的宗旨、原则及有关联合国决议，遵循相互尊重主权和领土完整、互不干涉内政等国际关系准则，不以任何方式支持台湾加入联合国及只能由主权国家参加的其他国际组织。
The Taiwan authorities have asserted that Resolution 2758 of the UN resolved only "the problem of China's representation," but not "the problem of Taiwan's representation," and demanded participation in the UN. We will never permit such a separatist act of creating "two Chinas" or "one China, one Taiwan." All members of the UN should adhere to the purpose and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and related UN resolutions, abide by norms governing international relations, including mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and non-interference in each other's internal affairs, and never, in any form, support Taiwan's joining the UN or other international organizations whose membership is confined to sovereign states.

　　对于某些允许地区参加的政府间国际组织，中国政府已经基于一个中国原则，根据有关国际组织的性质、章程和实际情况，以所能同意和接受的方式对台湾的加入问题作出了安排。台湾已作为中国的一个地区，以“中国台北”的名义，分别参加了亚洲开发银行(英文名称为TAI-PEI，CHINA)和亚太经合组织(英文名称为CHINESE　TAIPEI)等组织。一九九二年九月，世界贸易组织的前身关税及贸易总协定理事会主席声明指出，在中华人民共和国加入关贸总协定后，台湾可以“台湾、澎湖、金门、马祖单独关税区”(简称“中国台北”)的名义参加。世贸组织在审议接纳台湾加入该组织时，应坚持上述声明确定的原则。上述特殊安排，并不构成其他政府间国际组织及国际活动仿效的模式。

　　On the basis of the principle of one China, the Chinese government has made arrangements for Taiwan's participation in some inter-governmental international organizations which accept region membership in an agreeable and acceptable way according to the nature, regulations and actual conditions of these international organizations. As a region of China, Taiwan has participated in the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) respectively in the names of "Taipei, China" and "Chinese Taipei." In September 1992, the chairman of the council of the predecessor of the World Trade Organization (WTO), the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), stated that Taiwan may participate in this organization as "a separate Taiwan-Penghu-Jinmen-Mazu tariff zone" (abbreviated as Chinese Taipei) after the PRC's entry to GATT. The WTO should persist in the principle defined in the afore-said statement when examining the acceptance of Taiwan's entry to the organization. This is only an ad hoc arrangement and cannot constitute a model applicable to other inter-governmental international organizations or international gatherings.

　　与中国建交的国家不能向台湾出售武器，或与台湾进行任何形式的军事结盟。凡是与中国建交的国家，都应本着互相尊重主权和领土完整、互不干涉内政的原则，不以任何形式或借口向台湾出售武器，或帮助台湾生产武器。

　　No country maintaining diplomatic relations with China should provide arms to Taiwan or enter into military alliance of any form with Taiwan. All countries maintaining diplomatic relations with China should abide by the principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and non-interference in each other's internal affairs, and refrain from providing arms to Taiwan or helping Taiwan produce arms in any form or under any pretext.

　　台湾问题是中美关系中最核心、最敏感的问题。中美三个联合公报是两国关系健康、稳定发展的基础。二十多年来，美国承诺坚持一个中国政策，为自己带来了美中建交、两国关系发展和台湾局势相对稳定的利益。令人遗憾的是，美国一再违反自己在“八·一七公报”中对中国作出的庄严承诺，不断向台湾出售先进的武器和军事装备。现在，美国国会又有人炮制所谓《加强台湾安全法》，还企图将台湾纳入战区导弹防御系统。这是对中国内政的粗暴干涉和对中国安全的严重威胁，阻碍了中国的和平统一进程，同时也危害了亚太地区乃至世界的和平与稳定。对此，中国政府坚决反对。

　　The Taiwan question is the most crucial and most sensitive issue in the relations between China and the U.S. The three Sino-U.S. joint communiques are the basis for the healthy and stable development of relations between the two countries. For over twenty years, the U.S. has promised to adhere to a one-China Policy, which has brought to itself benefits such as the establishment of diplomatic relations with China, the development of Sino-U.S. relations and the relative stability of the Taiwan situation. Regrettably, the U.S. has repeatedly contravened its solemn undertakings to China made in the August 17 Communique and continued its sale of advanced arms and military equipment to Taiwan. Recently, some people in the U.S. Congress have cooked up the so-called Taiwan Security Enhancement Act and are attempting to include Taiwan in the TMDS. This is gross interference in China's internal affairs and a grave threat to China's security, obstructing the peaceful reunification of China and jeopardizing the peace and stability of the Asia-Pacific region and the world at large. The Chinese government is firmly against such actions.

　　中国政府以一个中国原则对待台湾的对外交往活动。台湾当局极力在国际上推行所谓“务实外交”，扩大所谓“国际生存空间”，其实质是制造“两个中国”、“一中一台”。中国政府理所当然地要坚决反对。同时，考虑到台湾经济社会发展的需要和台湾同胞的实际利益，中国政府对台湾同外国进行民间性质的经济、文化往来不持异议；并在一个中国前提下，采取了许多灵活措施，为台湾同外国的经贸、文化往来提供方便。例如，台湾可以“中国台北”的名义继续留在国际奥委会中。事实上，台湾与世界上许多国家和地区保持着广泛的经贸和文化联系，台湾同胞每年到国外旅游、经商、求学和进行学术、文化、体育交流活动的人员多达百万人次，年进出口贸易额高达2000多亿美元。这表明，坚持一个中国原则并不影响台湾同胞从事民间的对外交流活动，并未影响台湾正常的经贸、文化活动的需要。

　　The Chinese government adheres to the One-China Principle in dealing with Taiwan's contacts with the outside world. The Taiwan authorities have spared no effort to promote "pragmatic diplomacy" in the international arena and enlarge their "international space of survival," the essence of these being to create "two Chinas" or "one China, one Taiwan." It is only natural that the Chinese government should firmly oppose these. Meanwhile, considering the needs of Taiwan's socio-economic development and the actual benefits of compatriots in Taiwan, the Chinese government has no objection to Taiwan's non-governmental economic and cultural contacts with foreign countries; in fact, on the premise of one China, it has adopted many flexible measures to make Taiwan's economic, trade and cultural contacts with foreign countries more convenient. For example, Taiwan may stay on the International Olympic Committee in the name of "Chinese Taipei." As a matter of fact, Taiwan has maintained extensive economic, trade and cultural relations with many countries and regions in the world. Every year, a million Taiwan compatriots go abroad for travel, business or study, as well as for academic, cultural or sports exchanges, and Taiwan's annual import and export trade volume has exceeded the US$ 200-billion mark. This has demonstrated that adhering to the One-China Principle has not prevented Taiwan compatriots from engaging in non-governmental international exchanges or affected the needs of Taiwan's normal economic, trade and cultural activities.

　　中国政府保障台湾同胞在国外的一切正当、合法权益。台湾人民是我们的骨肉同胞。中国政府一贯致力于维护台湾同胞在国外的正当的、合法的权益。中国驻外国使领馆一向把加强与台湾同胞的联系、倾听台湾同胞的意见和要求、保障台湾同胞的利益作为自己的责任，尽可能帮助他们解决困难。在海湾战争中，中国使馆帮助滞留在科威特的台湾劳务人员安全撤离险境。日本阪神大地震发生后，中国使领馆及时抚慰受灾的台湾同胞。柬埔寨爆发内战后，中国使馆积极帮助生命财产受到严重威胁的台湾商人和旅游者安全转移和撤离。上述事例体现了中国政府对台湾同胞的关心和照顾。在海峡两岸实现统一后，台湾同胞更能够与全国各族人民一道充分共享中华人民共和国在国际上的尊严与荣誉。

　　The Chinese government safeguards all the justified and lawful rights and interests of Taiwan compatriots abroad. The people of Taiwan are of the same flesh and blood with us. The Chinese government has always worked for safeguarding their justified and lawful rights and interests abroad. Chinese embassies and consulates stationed abroad have always considered it their duties to strengthen their ties with Taiwan compatriots, listen to their suggestions and requests and safeguard their interests, and done everything they can to help them overcome their difficulties. During the Gulf War, the Chinese embassy helped Taiwanese labor service personnel held up in Kuwait pull out of dangerous places safely. After the big earthquakes in Osaka and Kobe, Japan, the Chinese embassy and consulate there promptly extended their sympathies to stricken Taiwan compatriots. When the civil war in Cambodia broke out, the Chinese embassy lost no time in helping Taiwanese business people and tourists whose lives and property were seriously imperiled by the war to move to safe places. All the above-mentioned facts reflect the Chinese government's care for Taiwan compatriots. When both sides of the Taiwan Straits are reunified, Taiwan compatriots will, together with people of all ethnic groups in the country, have more possibilities to fully enjoy the dignity and honor of the PRC in the world.

　　结束语

　　Conclusion

中国具有五千年悠久历史。
China has a long history of 5,000 years. 
中华民族繁衍生息在中国这块土地上，各民族相互融合，具有强大的凝聚力，形成了崇尚统一、维护统一的价值观念。
The Chinese people have lived and multiplied on this land where all ethnic groups have mixed together, in the course of which they have evolved powerful cohesiveness, and the values of cherishing and safeguarding unity. 
在漫长的历史过程中，中国虽然经历过改朝换代、政权更迭，出现过地方割据，遭遇过外敌入侵，特别是近代史上曾饱受外国列强的侵略和瓜分，但统一始终是中国历史发展的主流，每一次分裂之后都复归统一，并且都赢来了国家政治、经济、文化、科技的快速发展。台湾同胞具有光荣的爱国主义传统，在反抗外国侵略台湾的斗争中建立了卓越的功勋。中华人民共和国诞生后，中国人民倍加珍视得来不易的民族独立，坚决捍卫国家主权和领土完整，并为实现祖国的完全统一而努力奋斗。中国五千年的历史和文化深深地在中国人的心中根植了一种强烈的民族意识，这就是中国必须统一。中国政府希望国际社会始终如一地奉行一个中国政策，希望美国政府切实履行中美三个联合公报关于台湾问题的各项原则和自己作出的坚持一个中国政策的庄严承诺。
Over the long course of history, the Chinese nation has witnessed changes of dynasties, transfers of governments, local separatist regimes, and foreign invasions, especially the untold invasions and dismemberment by foreign powers in modern history. However, unity has always been the main trend in the development of Chinese history. After every separation, the country was invariably reunified, only to be followed in its wake by rapid political, economic, cultural, scientific and technological development. Our compatriots in Taiwan have a glorious tradition of patriotism, and have performed brilliant exploits in the struggles against foreign invasions of Taiwan. Since the founding of the PRC, the Chinese people have particularly valued their hard-earned national independence, firmly upheld state sovereignty and territorial integrity and struggled unswervingly for reunification of the motherland. The 5,000-year history and culture have been implanted deeply in the minds of the Chinese people, sprouting the strong national consciousness of the need for national unification. The Chinese government hopes that the international community will follow the principle of one China now and always and that the U.S. government will earnestly fulfil all the principles concerning the Taiwan issue in the three Sino-U.S. joint communiques, and its solemn promise to uphold the One-China Principle.

　　随着中国政府相继对香港、澳门恢复行使主权，全中国人民迫切期望早日解决台湾问题，实现国家的完全统一，不能允许台湾问题再无限期地拖下去了。我们坚信，在包括两岸同胞和海外侨胞在内的全中国人民的共同努力下，中国的完全统一一定能够实现。　

　　As the Chinese government has successively resumed the exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong and Macao, the people of the whole of China are eager to resolve the Taiwan issue as early as possible and realize the total reunification of the country. They cannot allow the resolution of the Taiwan issue to be postponed indefinitely. We firmly believe that the total reunification of China will be achieved through the joint efforts of the entire Chinese people including compatriots on both sides of the Taiwan Straits and those living overseas. 　
西藏文化的发展
The Development of Tibetan Culture

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council of the Peoples Republic of China 

二○○○年六月，北京
June 2000, Beijing

目　　录
Contents

前　　言
Foreword

藏语文得到广泛的学习、使用和发展
The Spoken and Written Tibetan Language Is Widely Studied and Used, and Being Developed

文物、典籍得到有效保护和积极利用
 Cultural Relics and Ancient Books and Records Are Well Preserved and Utilized

风俗习惯与宗教信仰自由得到尊重和保护
 Folk Customs and Freedom of Religious Belief Are Respected and Protected

文化艺术得到全面继承和发展
 Culture and Art Are Being Inherited and Developed in an All-Round Way

藏学研究全面展开，藏医藏药重放异彩
 Tibetan Studies Are Flourishing, and Tibetan Medicine and Pharmacology Have Taken On a New Lease of Life

人民教育事业实现历史性跨越
 Popular Education Makes a Historic Leap

新闻出版和广播影视事业发展迅速
 The News and Publishing, Broadcasting, Film and Television Industries Are Developing Rapidly

结束语
Conclusion


前言
Foreword
中国是一个统一的多民族国家。藏族作为中华民族大家庭中的一员，在与其他民族不断交流和相互吸收与促进的漫长历史中创造和发展了具有特色的灿烂文化。藏民族文化至今仍然是中华文化和世界文化宝库中的一颗璀璨的明珠。
China is a united multi-ethnic country. As a member of the big family of the Chinese nation, the Tibetan people have created and developed their brilliant and distinctive culture during a long history of continuous exchanges and contacts with other ethnic groups, all of whom have assimilated and promoted each other's cultures. Tibetan culture has all along been a dazzling pearl in the treasure-house of Chinese culture as well as that of the world as a whole.
藏族本土文化原本是位于雅鲁藏布江流域中部雅砻河谷的吐蕃文化和位于青藏高原西部的古象雄文化逐渐交融而形成的。到了公元七世纪松赞干布时期，佛教从中原、印度、尼泊尔传入吐蕃，逐渐形成和发展为独具特色的藏传佛教。与此同时，南亚的印度、尼泊尔文化以及西亚的波斯文化、阿拉伯文化等，特别是中原的汉文化，对西藏文化的发展产生了较大的影响。在西藏文化的历史发展过程中，藏族建筑艺术和雕塑、绘画、装饰、工艺美术等造型艺术以及音乐、舞蹈、戏剧、语言文字、书面文学、民间文学、藏医藏药、天文历算均达到了很高的水平。
The gradual merger of the Tubo culture of the Yalong Valley in the middle part of the basin of the Yarlung Zangbo River, and the ancient Shang-Shung culture of the western part of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau formed the native Tibetan culture. In the period of the reign of Songtsen Gampo in the seventh century, Buddhism was introduced to the Tubo people from the Central Plain of China, India and Nepal, and gradually developed into Tibetan Buddhism with its distinctive characteristics. At the same time, the Indian and Nepalese cultures of South Asia, the Persian and Arabic cultures of West Asia and especially the Han Chinese culture of the Central Plain had considerable influence on the development of Tibetan culture. In the long process of Tibetan cultural development, Tibetan architecture art and the plastic arts such as sculpture, painting, decoration and handicrafts, as well as music, dance, drama, spoken and written language, literature in written form, folk literature, Tibetan medicine and pharmacology, astronomy and the calendar all reached very high levels.
由于历史的原因，西藏后来发展成为一个极少数上层僧侣贵族掌权的政教合一的封建农奴制的地方政权，使得藏传佛教文化在一个较长的时期内处于西藏文化的主导地位。这种情况一直延续到1959年实行民主改革前。当时，西藏的生产资料和文化教育为极少数上层僧侣贵族所垄断，文化艺术只供少数上层僧侣和达官贵人消遣，占西藏人口95%的广大农奴和奴隶生活极度贫困，连基本的生存权都毫无保障，根本谈不上享受文化教育的权利。长期的政教合一的封建农奴制的统治不仅严重束缚了西藏生产力的发展，而且使西藏传统文化包括文物古迹、道场胜迹处于自我封闭和萎缩的状态。至于现代科学技术和文化教育，则更是一片空白。
Tibet later became a local regime practicing a system of feudal serfdom under a theocracy, and ruled by a few upper-class monks and nobles. This ensured that Tibetan Buddhist culture gained the dominant position in Tibetan culture for a long period of time, until the Democratic Reform was carried out in 1959. Throughout this period, a handful of upper-class lamas and aristocrats monopolized the means of production, culture and education. Cultural and artistic pursuits were regarded as their exclusive amusements, while the serfs and slaves, who constituted 95 percent of the Tibetan population, lived in extreme poverty and were not guaranteed even the basic right of subsistence, let alone the right to enjoy culture and education. The long reign of feudal serfdom under theocracy not only severely fettered the growth of the productive forces in Tibet, but also resulted in a hermetically sealed and moribund traditional Tibetan culture, including cultural relics, historic sites and sites for Buddhist worship. As for modern science, technology, culture and education, they did not get any chance to develop at all.
中华人民共和国成立后，中央人民政府十分重视藏民族优秀传统文化的保护和发展。1951年，中央人民政府在与西藏地方政府签订的关于和平解放西藏办法的“十七条协议”中明确规定：要“依据西藏的实际情况，逐步发展西藏的民族语言、文字和学校教育。”1959年，在中央政府的支持下，西藏实行民主改革，废除封建农奴制度，解放百万农奴和奴隶，逐步实行了民族区域自治制度，使西藏的社会和文化发展迈入了崭新的时代。西藏文化从此结束了为少数上层封建僧侣贵族所垄断的历史，成为西藏全体人民继承和发展的共同文化遗产。
After the People's Republic of China was founded in 1949, the Central People's Government attached great importance to the protection and development of the fine aspects of traditional Tibetan culture. The "Seventeen-Article Agreement" on measures for the peaceful liberation of Tibet signed by the Central People's Government and the local government of Tibet in 1951 clearly stipulates: "In accordance with the actual conditions of Tibet, the spoken and written Tibetan language and school education will be progressively developed." In 1959, with the support of the Central Government, Tibet carried out the Democratic Reform to abolish the feudal serf system and liberate the million serfs and slaves, and implemented the ethnic regional autonomy system there step by step. This marked the advent of a brand-new era in the social and cultural development of Tibet, and ended the monopoly exercised over Tibetan culture by the few upper-class feudal lamas and aristocrats, making it the common legacy for all the people of Tibet to inherit and carry on.
40多年来，中央人民政府和西藏自治区人民政府根据《宪法》和《民族区域自治法》的规定，为满足西藏人民日益增长的物质文化生活需要，在促进西藏社会经济发展的同时，投入巨大的人力、财力和物力，运用法律、经济和行政等多种手段，保护和弘扬藏族优秀传统文化，大力开创和发展现代科学文化教育事业，取得了举世瞩目的成就。西藏全体人民作为新时代的主人共同继承、发展和分享藏民族传统文化，共同创造现代文明生活和文化事业，使西藏文化出现了前所未有的繁荣与发展。
In accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and the Law on Ethnic Regional Autonomy, the Central People's Government and the People's Government of the Tibet Autonomous Region have made great efforts in the past 40-plus years to promote the social and economic development of Tibet, to satisfy the Tibetan people's increasing needs for rich material and cultural lives. At the same time, they have devoted large amounts of human, financial and material resources to protecting and carrying forward the fine aspects of traditional Tibetan culture, as well as initiating and developing modern science, culture and education by employing legal, economic and administrative means. As a result, considerable achievements attracting worldwide attention have been attained. All the people in Tibet, as masters of the new era, jointly carry on, develop and enjoy the traditional Tibetan culture, and jointly create modern civilized life and culture, bringing unprecedented prosperity and development to Tibetan culture.

藏语文得到广泛的学习、使用和发展
    The Spoken and Written Tibetan Language Is Widely Studied and Used, and Being Developed

西藏自治区是藏族聚居地区，藏族人口占95%以上，藏语言文字是全区通用的语言文字。西藏自治区高度重视依照《宪法》和《民族区域自治法》维护和保障藏族人民学习、使用和发展本民族语言文字的权利，先后于1987年和1988年颁布实施《西藏自治区学习、使用和发展藏语文的若干规定(试行)》和《西藏自治区学习、使用和发展藏语文的若干规定(试行)的实施细则》，将学习、使用和发展藏语文的工作纳入法制化的轨道。西藏各级政府依法落实保护和发展藏民族语言文字的规定，在保障藏族人民学习和使用本民族语言文字权利的同时，使藏语言文字随着政治、经济、文化事业的发展而得到不断的发展。
The Tibet Autonomous Region is an area where Tibetan people live in concentrated communities, constituting more than 95 percent of the population of the region. In Tibet, the spoken and written Tibetan language is universally used. In accordance with the stipulations of the Constitution and the Law on Ethnic Regional Autonomy, the Tibet Autonomous Region has paid great attention to maintaining and safeguarding the Tibetan people's right to study, use and develop their spoken and written language. It promulgated and implemented Some Provisions of the Tibet Autonomous Region on the Study, Use and Development of the Spoken and Written Tibetan Language (Draft) and the Rules for the Implementation of "Some Provisions of the Tibet Autonomous Region on the Study, Use and Development of the Spoken and Written Tibetan Language (Draft)" in 1987 and 1988, respectively. These two laws put the work related to the study, use and development of the spoken and written Tibetan language on a legal track. The governments at all levels in Tibet have implemented the provisions on protecting and developing the spoken and written Tibetan language according to law, safeguarding the Tibetan people's right to study and use their native language, and making the language develop continuously together with the development of politics, economy and culture.
藏语言文字在西藏社会生活各个方面得到广泛使用。1959年民主改革以来，西藏自治区人民代表大会通过的决议、法规，西藏各级政府和政府各部门下达的正式文件、发布的公告都使用藏汉两种文字。在司法诉讼活动中，对藏族诉讼参与人，都使用藏语文审理案件，法律文书都使用藏文。各单位的公章、证件、表格、信封、信笺、稿纸、标识以及机关、厂矿、学校、车站、机场、商店、宾馆、影剧院、体育馆的标牌和街道名称、交通路标等均使用藏汉两种文字。
The spoken and written Tibetan language is widely used in every aspect of social life in Tibet. Since the Democratic Reform in 1959, the Tibetan and Han Chinese languages have been used for all the resolutions, laws and regulations adopted by the People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region, and the official documents and proclamations issued by the governments at all levels or their departments in Tibet. In judicial proceedings, the spoken and written Tibetan language is used in trying cases and in the relevant legal documents if the litigant participants are Tibetans. Both the Tibetan and Han Chinese languages are used for all work units' official seals, certificates, forms, stationery, and signs, and signboards of institutions, factories, mines, schools, railway stations, airports, stores and shops, hotels, cinemas, theaters and gymnasiums, street and road signs, and traffic signs.
目前，西藏自治区的广播电视每天藏语播出时间达20多小时。1999年10月1日西藏电视台卫视频道开播之后，每天都播放藏语节目和藏语译制片。电影坚持面向基层、面向农牧区，每年保证有25部新译制的藏语电影在各地放映。藏文图书报刊发展很快，仅1989年以来的10年间就出版藏文图书441种，许多高质量的藏文图书还在国内外获奖。据统计，西藏现有藏文杂志14种，藏文报纸10种。《西藏日报》藏文版每天出版，大量稿件直接用藏语文采写、编辑，此外还投巨资建立了计算机藏文编辑排版系统，结束了铅字排版的历史。《西藏科技报》和《西藏科技信息报》都创办了藏文版，深受广大农牧民欢迎。西藏所有文艺团体都用藏文创作节目，用藏语表演。
At present, the radio and TV stations in the Tibet Autonomous Region broadcast in the Tibetan language for over 20 hours per day. On October 1, 1999, The Tibet Television started its satellite broadcasting channel, which broadcast telefilms and other programs in the Tibetan language every day. The cinema is oriented toward grassroots and farming and pastoral areas, guaranteeing that at least 25 movies newly dubbed into the Tibetan language are shown in the various places in Tibet every year. Meanwhile, the publication of Tibetan books, magazines and newspapers has made rapid progress. Since 1989 alone, 441 titles of books have been published in the Tibetan language, of which many have won domestic or international awards. There are altogether 14 magazines and 10 newspapers published in the Tibetan language in Tibet. The Tibetan edition of the Tibet Daily is published every day, with a large number of articles and news dispatches written or edited in the Tibetan language directly. The newspaper has said good-bye to sort typesetting by investing a considerable sum of money to establish Tibetan computer editing and typesetting systems. Both Tibet Science and Technology News and Tibet Scientific and Technological Information have their Tibetan-language editions, which are very popular among the farmers and herdsmen. All the art troupes in Tibet create programs and perform in the Tibetan language.
藏语文学习依法得到保障。西藏自治区教育系统全面推行以藏语文授课为主的双语教育体系，已经编译出版了从小学至高中所有课程的藏文教材和教学参考资料。
The study of the Tibetan language is protected by law. Educational institutions in the Tibet Autonomous Region universally practice a bilingual educational system whereby teaching is done principally in the Tibetan language. Furthermore, the teaching and reference materials for all the courses from primary school to senior high school have been edited in or translated into the Tibetan language.
随着时代的进步和社会的发展，藏语文的词汇和语法得到不断充实、丰富和发展。藏文专业术语规范化及信息技术标准化工作取得了重大进展。藏文编码已正式通过中国国家标准和国际标准，藏文的信息化正在走向世界。
As the times progress and society advances, the Tibetan language develops in tandem, with its vocabulary and grammar continuously enriched. Much headway has been made in the normalization of technical terms and standardization of information technology in the Tibetan language. The encoded Tibetan language has been formally recognized by the Chinese state and international standards, and the promotion of the Tibetan language as an Internet communication tool is proceeding apace.
文物、典籍得到有效保护和积极利用
Cultural Relics and Ancient Books and Records Are Well Preserved and Utilized
在旧西藏，文物保护几乎是空白。
In old Tibet, cultural relic protection was virtually nonexistent. 
西藏实行民主改革以后，文物保护工作受到中央人民政府的高度重视。
since the Democratic Reform, the Central People's Government has attached great importance to the protection of cultural relics in Tibet. 
早在1959年6月，中国就成立了西藏文物古迹文件档案管理委员会，集中收集和保护了大量的文物和档案典籍。同时，中央人民政府专门组织工作组分赴拉萨、日喀则、山南等地，对重点文物进行实地调查。布达拉宫、大昭寺、甘丹寺、藏王墓、江孜宗山抗英遗址、古格王国遗址等9处被列入1961年国务院公布的第一批全国重点文物保护单位。即使是在“文化大革命”这样一个特殊的时期，周恩来总理还亲自指示对布达拉宫等重点文物保护单位采取特殊措施加以保护，使之免遭破坏。“文化大革命”之后，中央人民政府投资3亿多元人民币，修复开放了1400多座寺庙，及时修缮和保护了大批文物。特别是1989年到1994年之间，中央人民政府拨出5500万元巨款以及大量黄金、白银等贵重物资维修了布达拉宫，这在中国文物保护史上是空前的。1994年5月，联合国教科文组织世界遗产委员会委托的专家对维修竣工的布达拉宫进行了实地考察，认为维修的设计和施工都达到了国际先进水平，是“古建筑保护史上的奇迹”，“对藏文化乃至世界文化保护做出了巨大贡献”。随后，在1994年12月，布达拉宫由于其本身价值与保护状况，被世界遗产委员会一致同意列入《世界遗产名录》。同时，各国代表还支持将拉萨大昭寺列入同一世界遗产项目。现在，中央人民政府每年对西藏文物保护事业的经费投入达400—500万元人民币。1994年到1997年，中央人民政府投资近1亿元人民币援建了占地面积52479平方米、建筑面积21000平方米的西藏自治区博物馆，成为全国屈指可数的现代化博物馆之一。
As early as in June 1959, the Tibet Cultural Relics, Historical Sites, Documents and Archives Management Committee was established to collect and protect a large number of cultural relics, archives, and ancient books and records. At the same time, the Central People's Government assigned work teams to Lhasa, Xigaze and Shannan to conduct on-the-spot investigations of major cultural relics. A total of nine historical sites were listed among the first batch of important cultural relic sites under state-level protection by the State Council in 1961, including the Potala Palace, Jokhang Temple, Ganden Monastery, Tibetan King's Tomb, Mount Dzong (Dzongri) Anti-British Monument in Gyangze County, and the Guge Kingdom ruins. Even in such a special period as the "Cultural Revolution" (1966-1976), Premier Zhou Enlai gave instructions personally that special measures be taken to protect major cultural relics like the Potala Palace from destruction. After the "Cultural Revolution," the Central People's Government took prompt measures to repair and protect a lot of historical relics, investing more than 300 million yuan to repair and open 1,400-odd monasteries and temples. In particular, between 1989 and 1994, the Central People's Government allocated 55 million yuan and a great quantity of gold, silver and other precious materials to repair the Potala Palace, which was unprecedented in China's history of historical relic preservation. In May 1994, experts entrusted by the UNESCO World Heritage Committee inspected the repaired Potala Palace and said that the design and construction of the repairs had both the attained advanced world levels. They considered it "a miracle in the history of ancient building protection" and "a great contribution to the protection of Tibetan, and even world, culture." In December 1994, in view of its importance and condition of protection the World Heritage Committee unanimously agreed to place the Potale Palace on the World Heritage List. Meanwhile, representatives from various countries also expressed their support for the proposal on including the Jokhang Temple in Lhasa in the same list. Now, the Central People's Government allocates four to five million yuan every year for cultural relic protection in Tibet. From 1994 to 1997, the Central Government invested nearly 100 million yuan to construct the Tibet Autonomous Region Museum, one of the leading modern museums in China, with an area of 52,479 square meters and a floor space of 21,000 square meters.
西藏自治区人民政府于1965年成立自治区文物管理委员会，专司全区文物保护管理工作，并公布小昭寺、热振寺、楚布寺等11处自治区级重点文物保护单位，对其中急需维修的进行了维修。进入八十年代以后，西藏自治区先后颁布了《西藏自治区人民政府关于加强文物保护的布告》、《西藏自治区流散文物管理暂行规定》、《西藏自治区文物保护管理条例》、《布达拉宫保护管理办法》等一系列文物保护法规和规定，使西藏的文物保护工作走上了法制化、规范化的管理轨道。与此同时，西藏的文物保护队伍从无到有，不断发展壮大。据统计，西藏现有专业文物考古工作者270余人，其中95%是藏族。
In 1965, the People's Government of the Tibet Autonomous Region set up the Cultural Relics Administration Committee to take charge of the preservation and administration of cultural relics in Tibet. It named 11 historical sites, such as Ramoche Monastery, Radreng Monastery and Tsurpu Monastery, as important cultural relic sites under autonomous region-level protection, and repaired those that urgently needed repair. Beginning in the 1980s, the Tibet Autonomous Region has issued successively the Proclamation of the People's Government of the Tibet Autonomous Region on Improving the Preservation of Cultural Relics, the Interim Provisions of the Tibet Autonomous Region on the Administration of Scattered Cultural Relics, the Regulations of the Tibet Autonomous Region on the Protection and Administration of Cultural Relics, and the Measures for the Protection and Administration of the Potala Palace. These laws and regulations have brought the work of preserving cultural relics in Tibet within the orbit of legalization and standardization. At the same time, a large contingent of cultural relic protection staff has been formed, and the ranks of such personnel are constantly growing. According to statistics, there are now more than 270 archeologists in Tibet, among whom 95 percent are Tibetans.
文物考古工作成效卓著。
Remarkable achievements have been gained in archeological work. 
西藏昌都卡若遗址的考古发掘，为中外文物界所瞩目。七十年代以来，中国的考古工作者在西藏进行了多次文物考古发掘，发现了新、旧石器时代的多处人类生存的遗迹，逐步揭开了西藏社会历史和民族传统文化的神秘面纱。从八十年代中期到九十年代初开展的全区文物普查，调查和发现文物点1700余处，采集、征集和发掘出土各类文物数千件，初步整理文字资料600多万字，线图670余张，拍摄照片3万多张，临摹碑文、石刻造像和壁画400余幅，从而勾勒出西藏从古至今的演变和发展轮廓，揭示了藏族文化与汉族以及周边各民族源远流长的文化交流，为当代和后代文物考古工作者加强西藏文物保护和考古工作提供了翔实可靠的依据。目前，西藏有全国重点文物保护单位18处，国家级历史文化名城3座，自治区级文物保护单位64处，县市级文物保护单位20余处。近年来，西藏在日本、法国、意大利、阿根廷等国成功地举办了西藏文物展览，促进了藏民族文化与国际上其他民族文化的交流，增进了国际社会对西藏的了解。
Among them, the excavation of the Karuo ruins, Qamdo, attracted the attention of archeologists both at home and abroad. Since the 1970s, China has conducted archeological work extensively in Tibet and unearthed many Old and New Stone Age sites, gradually unveiling the mystery of the origins of the society, history and traditional culture of Tibet. A general survey made from the mid-1980s to the beginning of the 1990s discovered 1,700-odd sites of cultural remains, and unearthed and collected several thousand cultural relics. In addition, over six million words of archeological documents were edited, along with 670-odd diagrams, more than 30,000 photos were taken, and some 400 pictures of tablet inscriptions, stone statues and murals were copied. These materials have helped outline the changes and development of Tibet from ancient to modern times, and revealed the long-standing cultural exchanges between the Tibetan, Han and other neighboring ethnic groups. Moreover, they furnish a full and reliable basis for archeological workers of the present and later times to better preserve cultural relics and strengthen archeological work in Tibet. Currently, there are 18 important cultural relic sites under state-level protection, three famous historical and cultural cities under state-level protection, 64 cultural relic sites under autonomous region-level protection, and 20-odd cultural relic sites under county- or city-level protection in Tibet. In recent years, Tibet has successfully held Tibetan cultural relic exhibitions in Japan, France, Italy, Argentina and other countries, promoting cultural exchanges between Tibet and other nations worldwide, and helping the international community better understand Tibet.
西藏的文献档案得到妥善保护。西藏藏文文献档案数量巨大，门类繁多，在中国仅次于汉文文献档案。1959年6月，根据国务院的指示，西藏自治区筹备委员会颁发了《关于加强文物古迹、文件档案管理工作的若干规定》，并着手整理、抢救、收集、保管原西藏地方政府及其下属各个部门的文件档案材料以及各寺庙和贵族收藏的文件档案，建立了比较完整的馆藏档案。1984年，中央人民政府拨出巨款，新建了功能较为齐全，设施较为现代化的西藏自治区档案馆，极大地改善了档案的管理条件。目前，西藏自治区档案馆馆藏档案达300多万卷。由西藏自治区档案馆编辑的《西藏历史档案荟萃》、《铁虎清册》等大型图书的出版，成为一部部“铁券文书”。西藏各级各部门共收藏纸质、缣帛和木、金属、石、叶等质地的档案400余万卷，除90%多的藏文外，还有汉、满、蒙、印地、梵、尼泊尔、英、俄等10余种文字，档案内容上起元朝，下迄当代，是一个时代体系完整的历史档案宝库。
Ancient documents and archives are well preserved in Tibet. There are enormous numbers of Tibetan-language documents and archives in various categories, next in number only to the Han-Chinese language ones. In June 1959, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, on the instructions of the State Council, issued Some Provisions on Strengthening the Administration of Cultural Relics, Historical Sites, Documents and Archives, and started to edit, preserve, collect and store the documents and archives of the former local government of Tibet and its subordinate departments, as well as those collected by monasteries, temples and aristocrats. As a result, a fairly complete collection of archives was established. In 1984, the Central People's Government allocated a large amount of money to build the new Tibet Autonomous Region Archives, with improved functions and modern facilities. At present, there are over three million volumes in the Archives. Large-format books such as A Selection of Tibetan Historical Archives and An Inventory of the Year of the Iron-Tiger edited by the Tibet Autonomous Region Archives have been published, furnishing precious materials for research. The government institutions at all levels in Tibet have collected over four million volumes of archives on paper, silk, wood, metal, stone and Pattra leaf. Among them, more than 90 percent are in Tibetan, and the others in a variety of languages such as Han Chinese, Manchu, Mongolian, Hindi, Sanskrit, Nepalese, English and Russian. These archives, which date from the Yuan Dynasty to contemporary times, constitute a treasure-house of chronolog- ically complete historical records.
风俗习惯与宗教信仰自由得到尊重和保护
 Folk Customs and Freedom of Religious Belief Are Respected and Protected
国家尊重和保障西藏各民族人民特别是广大藏族人民按照自己传统的风俗习惯生活和进行社会活动的权利，尊重和保障他们按照自己的意愿进行正常的宗教信奉、祭祀活动和参加重大的宗教和民间节日活动的自由。
The state respects and safeguards the rights of the Tibetans and other ethnic groups in Tibet to live their lives and conduct social activities in accordance with their traditional customs, and their freedoms to engage in normal religious activities and major religious and folk festival celebrations. 
与此同时，一些与封建农奴制相伴随的腐朽、落后、蔑视劳动群众的旧习俗，随着社会的进步与发展而被群众所摒弃，这既反映了藏族人民对现代文明、健康生活的追求，也是藏族文化在新时代不断进步的一种表现。藏族群众在保持藏族服饰、饮食、住房的传统方式和风格的同时，在衣食住行、婚丧嫁娶各方面也吸收了不少新的现代文化习俗，极大地丰富了西藏人民的生活。每年各地群众的节庆集会，既有大量的传统节日，如拉萨的藏历新年、萨噶达瓦节、望果节、雪顿节、沐浴节、酥油灯节、达玛节、煨桑节、噶尔恰钦节、赛马会等和拉萨以外其他地区的各种节日，以及许多寺庙的宗教节日，如扎什伦布寺的什莫钦布节、甘丹寺的昂觉节，桑耶寺的经藏跳神节、萨迦寺的七月金刚节、楚布寺的树经幡杆节、热振寺的帕蚌唐郭节等等，又有全国乃至世界性的新兴节庆集会，如三八妇女节、五一劳动节、五四青年节、六一儿童节、十一国庆节等。现代文明的新思想、新文化与藏族传统的优秀文化相结合，使西藏形成了既有民族特色又有时代精神的新风俗、新习惯。　
As society progresses, some decayed, backward old customs despising laboring people that bear a strong tinge of the feudal serf system have been abandoned, which reflects the Tibetans' pursuit of modern civilization and a healthy life as well as the continuous development of Tibetan culture in the new era. The Tibetan people, while maintaining their traditions, have greatly enriched their lives by absorbing many new cultural customs, as displayed in dress and adornments, diet, residence, weddings and funerals. There are many traditional festivals and fairs in Tibet, including the Tibetan New Year, Sakadawa Festival, Ongkor (Bumper Harvest) Festival, Shoton (Yogurt) Festival, Bathing Festival, Butter Lamp Festival, Dharma Festival, Burning Offerings Festival, Garchachen Festival, and Horse Race Fair of Lhasa and many festivals of other places. Religious festivals celebrated by monasteries include the Shimo Chento Festival of Tashilhunpo Monastery, Nganjo Festival of Ganden Monastery, Collecting Sutras and Religious Dance festivals of Samye Monastery, July Vajra Festival of Sakya Monastery, Erecting the Prayer Banner Pole Festival of Tsurpu Monastery, and Paltung Tanbo Festival of Radreng Monastery. In addition, the Tibetans also celebrate some national and international festivals such as International Working Women's Day (March 8th), International Labor Day (May 1st), Chinese Youth Festival (May 4th), International Children's Day (June 1st) and National Day (October 1st). Combining new concepts and the new culture of modern civilization with the fine aspects of traditional Tibetan culture, Tibet has formed new customs and habits with the characteristics of both the ethnic group and the times.
中央人民政府和西藏自治区人民政府特别注意尊重和保护藏族人民的宗教信仰自由和正常的宗教活动。民主改革以后，按照大多数僧尼的意愿和人民群众宗教信仰的需要，有关宗教的文物、古迹、寺庙都得到了妥善保护。中央政府把布达拉宫、拉萨三大寺、大昭寺、日喀则扎什伦布寺等列为国家重点文物保护单位。这些寺院的壁画、雕刻、塑像、唐卡、工艺装饰、经卷、供品、法器、佛龛，包括经堂、殿宇、寺庙、塔刹等宗教文化的载体，都尽力保护或修缮复原。特别是八十年代以来，国家拨出巨款，重修了甘丹寺、雍布拉康、桑嘎果托寺等著名寺庙，抢救维修了年久失修的桑耶寺、夏鲁寺、萨迦寺、昌珠寺、强巴林寺、托林寺等一批著名寺庙。布达拉宫、罗布林卡、萨迦寺等所藏经卷和典籍获得了很好的保护，《布达拉宫典籍目录》、《雪域文库》和《德吴宗教源流》等文献古籍得到及时抢救、整理、出版。目前，西藏共有1700多座寺庙和各类宗教活动场所，僧尼46000多人，各种宗教活动正常举行，每年都如期举行各种重大宗教节日或活动。中国佛教协会西藏分会，是西藏藏传佛教各教派的组织，现有地(市)级佛教协会7个，并有藏文版会刊《西藏佛教》以及1所西藏佛学院和1所藏文印经院。
The Central People's Government and the government of the Tibet Autonomous Region have all along paid special attention to respect for and protection of the freedom of religious belief and normal religious activities of the Tibetan people. Since the Democratic Reform, religion-related cultural relics and historical sites, monasteries and temples have been well preserved at the behest of both the clerical and secular masses. The Potala Palace, the Three Grand Monasteries in Lhasa, Jokhang Temple and Tashilhunpo Monastery in Xigaze have been listed as important cultural relic sites under state-level protection by the Central Government. The murals, sculptures, statues, Thangkas (scroll paintings), artistic decorations, scriptures, offerings, ritual musical instruments and shrines of Buddha of those monasteries, as well as the scripture halls, worship halls, monasteries, temples and pagodas, the carriers of religious culture, have been preserved as far as possible or have been repaired or restored to their original condition. Especially beginning in the 1980s, the state has allocated large amounts of money for the reconstruction of some famous monasteries, including the Ganden, Yumbulagang and Sanggagorto monasteries, and the repairing of well-known but dilapidated monasteries, such as the Samye, Shalu, Sakya, Changzhug, Qamba Ling and Toling monasteries. The scriptures and classics of the Potala Palace, the Norbulingka and Sakya Monastery have been well preserved, with some edited and published as the Catalogue of the Classics of the Potala Palace, Ancient Books of the Snowland, and Origin of Religions by Deu. Now, Tibet is home to more than 1,700 monasteries, temples and other sites of religious activity, with over 46,000 Buddhist monks and nuns. Each year, religious activities are held and important religious festivals are celebrated on schedule in the Autonomous Region. The Tibet Branch of the Buddhist Association of China, an umbrella organization of the various sects of Tibetan Buddhism, now has seven prefecture (city)-level sub-branches, the journal Buddhism in Tibet in the Tibetan language, an institute of Buddhist theology and a Tibetan scripture printing house.
文化艺术得到全面继承和发展
     Culture and Art Are Being Inherited and Developed in an All-Round Way

中央人民政府和西藏自治区人民政府一贯重视藏民族文化艺术的继承和发展。
The Central People's Government and the People's Government of the Tibet Autonomous Region have all along attached importance to the inheritance and development of Tibetan culture and art.
早在五十年代，一批进藏的各族文艺工作者与藏族文艺工作者一道，到民间采风，收集了一批音乐、舞蹈、民间故事、谚语、民谣等，陆续整理出版了《西藏歌谣》等一批书籍。七十年代末开始，国家又对西藏民族民间文化艺术遗产进行了大规模、有系统的普查、搜集、采录和整理工作。八十年代以来，自治区及各地、市成立了民族文化遗产抢救、整理和研究机构，展开了历史上规模空前的抢救、搜集、整理、研究、编辑、出版民族民间文学艺术遗产的工作。西藏自治区先后派出调查组，深入全区城镇、乡村和寺院进行全面调查和采录，搜集了藏汉文资料两三千万字，录制了大量的音像资料，拍摄图片近万幅。先后编辑出版了《中国戏曲志?西藏卷》、《中国民间歌谣集成?西藏卷》、《中国民族民间舞蹈集成?西藏卷》、《中国谚语集成?西藏卷》。有关西藏曲艺、民族民间歌曲、戏曲音乐、民间故事的文艺集成也正在编纂之中，即将出版。这些文艺集成志书的编纂和出版，是对西藏优秀民族传统文化、民间文艺进行全面抢救和有效保护的创举。
As early as in the 1950s, a group of literary and art workers from different ethnic groups went to Tibet to collect music, dance, folk stories, proverbs and folk songs together with their Tibetan counterparts, and edited them for publication. One fruit of their labors was the book Tibetan Folk Songs. Beginning at the end of the 1970s, the state conducted a large-scale systematic survey, collection and edition of the Tibetan folk cultural and art heritage. Since the 1980s, a group of region-, prefecture- and city-level institutions have been set up to save, collect, research, edit and publish the Tibetan folk literary and art heritage, on a scale without parallel in history. The regional government has assigned survey teams to go to the towns, villages and monasteries to make extensive investigation and collection of this heritage. These efforts have resulted in the collection of about 30 million words of written materials in the Han Chinese and Tibetan languages, the making of a large amount of video tapes and the taking of nearly 10,000 pictures. On this basis, the History of Chinese Operas and Story-telling Ballads: Tibet Volume, Collection of Chinese Folk Songs: Tibet Volume, Collection of Folk Dances of Chinese Ethnic Groups: Tibet Volume, and Collection of Chinese Proverbs: Tibet Volume have been published, and a series of collections of Tibetan ballads, folk songs, opera music and folk stories are now under compilation and will be published very soon. The editing and publishing of these books reflects the regional government's achievements in the protection of the fine aspects of traditional Tibetan culture and folk literature and art.
世界著名的《格萨尔王传》是藏族人民在漫长历史长河中创造出来的一部珍贵的长篇英雄史诗，是中国乃至世界文学宝库中少有的珍品，但一直是通过民间说唱艺人口头流传。为了保护藏民族的这一文化瑰宝，西藏自治区于1979年成立了抢救、整理《格萨尔王传》的专门机构，进行全面搜集、采录、整理、研究和出版工作。国家将《格萨尔》列入“六五”、“七五”、“八五”三个五年计划的重点科研项目。经过20年的努力，共搜集藏文手抄本、木刻本近300部，除去异文本约有100部，现已正式出版藏文本70余部，总印数达300余万册，使这一长期零散传唱的口头文学变成了一部系统完整、被称为“世界史诗之王”的文学巨著。同时还出版了20多部汉译本，并有若干种译成英、日、法文出版。这在藏族民间文艺遗产的保护以及出版史上都是前所未有的。
The world-famous Life of King Gesar, a lengthy and valuable heroic epic created by the Tibetan people over a considerable length of time, is a rare literary treasure of China and the whole of mankind. However, it has all along been passed down by folk artists orally. To better protect it, the regional authorities set up special bodies in 1979 for the collection, research, editing and publishing of the Life of King Gesar. The state placed it on the key scientific research project lists of the Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Five-Year Plans. After 20 years of effort, nearly 300 handwritten or block-printed Tibetan volumes have been collected. Among them, except 100 variant volumes, about 70 volumes have been formally published in the Tibetan language, with a total print run of well over three million copies. Thus, this epic, which had for long centuries been known only to a few folk artists, has come out as a systematically complete literary masterpiece that is called "the king of world epics." In addition, over 20 volumes of the Chinese edition have been published, and some have been translated into English, Japanese and French, and distributed all over the world. This was an unprecedented achievement in protecting the Tibetan literary and art heritage, as well as in publishing history.
西藏的现代文学艺术事业在同民族传统形式、风格和特色相结合的过程中得到了巨大发展。西藏和平解放后，一批从内地进藏的各族文艺工作者一边深入现实生活，一边发掘继承优秀的民族文艺传统，创作了一批诗歌、小说、歌舞、美术、电影、摄影等作品，给处于封闭和半封闭状态的西藏带来了新的文艺思想和文艺创作经验。一大批爱好文艺的藏族知识分子参加到新的文艺队伍中，创作了一批新的具有鲜明民族特色的现代文艺作品。1959年民主改革以后，西藏更涌现了一批优秀的文艺作品，如歌曲《北京的金山上》和《翻身农奴把歌唱》、表演唱《逛新城》、歌舞《洗衣歌》、音乐舞蹈史诗《翻身农奴向太阳》、话剧《文成公主》、电影《农奴》等，在国内外都产生了一定影响。近50年来，西藏专业文学艺术工作者共创作和演出了569个具有浓郁民族风格和强烈时代气息的新编文学艺术作品和舞台剧(节)目，其中获全国性奖51项，全区性奖121项。全区各专业艺术表演团体近5年来共演出4887场，观众达279万人次，每年为基层群众演出达400余场。
Modern Tibetan literature and art have developed greatly in the process of combining with the traditional formats, styles and characteristics. After the peaceful liberation of Tibet, a group of literary and art workers from different ethnic groups went into the thick of life in Tibet to explore and inherit the fine aspects of the local literature and art tradition. They created a lot of poems, novels, songs, dances, fine art works, films and photos, introducing new literary and artistic ideas and creation experience to the then closed or semi-closed parts of Tibet. A large body of Tibetan intellectuals loving literature and art joined the new ranks of literary and art workers, and created a batch of modern works with distinctive ethnic features. Particularly after the Democratic Reform in 1959, a number of excellent literary and art works emerged in Tibet and, to a certain degree, influenced people both at home and abroad. These works include the songs "On the Golden Hill of Beijing" and "Liberated Serfs Sing," the song with actions "Strolling Around the New Town," the song and dance combination "Washing Clothes," dance epic with music "Emancipated Serfs Turn Toward the Sun," drama "Princess Wen Cheng" and movie "The Serfs." Over the past half century, professional literary and art workers in Tibet have created and performed a total of 569 literary and art works and theatrical programs with distinctive ethnic features and a strong feel of the times, of which 51 have won national awards, and 121 regional awards. In the past five years, professional theatrical troupes in Tibet have presented 4,887 performances, attracting audiences totaling 2.79 million. In addition, they have presented over 400 performances for ordinary people every year.
群众性的文化艺术事业蓬勃发展。1959年以后，翻身农奴在广大城乡纷纷成立业余歌舞队和藏戏队，以群众喜闻乐见的文艺形式，自编自演了众多反映翻身解放后新生活的节目。1963年举行了全区第一次群众文艺汇演，并组成代表团赴京参加全国少数民族业余文艺汇演，演出了一批既有新内容又有鲜明民族特色的好节目，展示了群众文艺创作的新水平。近5年来，在中央人民政府和兄弟省、市的支援下，西藏的文化设施建设力度显著加大，累计投资1.4046 亿元。目前，西藏已建成各级群众艺术馆、综合文化馆和文化站400多个，这些文化场所可以开展内容丰富、形式多样的文娱、体育活动。西藏图书馆于1996年7月开馆，现已接待藏族读者10余万人次。西藏现有县级乌兰牧骑演出队17个，业余文艺演出队和藏戏演出队160余个，他们常年活跃在农牧区，深受群众喜爱，不少节目在全国性和自治区文艺汇演中获奖。各地、市、县还举办不定期的群众文艺汇演，促进了群众文化活动的繁荣。近几年，每逢藏族传统节日“雪顿节”，西藏都举行藏戏、歌舞演出，开展丰富多彩的群众自娱性传统文化活动。洛扎县(藏戏、歌舞)、比如县(民间造型艺术)、贡嘎县昌果乡(民间舞蹈)、昂仁县窘日吾齐(藏戏)、江孜县(藏毯纺织)还被国家正式命名为民间艺术之乡。国家投资260多万元在堆龙德庆县建成了国家级农村儿童文化园，并于1996年成立了西藏少年儿童艺术团。西藏少年儿童艺术团两度赴北京演出，并于1998年赴美国参加国际儿童艺术节演出，均获得巨大成功。1995年至1999年，西藏自治区先后派出包括藏族群众业余演出团在内的40个艺术团组360人次，到世界五大洲20多个国家和地区进行演出、展览和学术交流活动，所到之处无不引起轰动。
Popular culture and art have developed energetically. Beginning in 1959, the emancipated serfs set up amateur song and dance and Tibetan opera teams one after another in cities and townships. They composed, wrote and performed a number of programs reflecting the people's new life since the liberation in the forms loved by the masses. In 1963, Tibet, for the first time, held a regional popular theatrical festival, and formed a delegation to participate in the National Amateur Theatrical Festival of Ethnic Minorities in Beijing. The delegation performed a number of excellent programs with new contents and distinctive ethnic characteristics, displaying the new level of popular literary and artistic creation. In the past five years, with the support of the Central People's Government and other autonomous regions, provinces and municipalities, Tibet has intensified its efforts for the construction of cultural facilities, investing a total of 140.46 million yuan in this sphere. So far, Tibet has constructed more than 400 mass art centers, where rich recreational and sports activities of diverse forms can be carried out. The Tibet Library was opened in July 1996, and has been visited by over 100,000 Tibetan readers so far. Now Tibet has 17 mobile performance teams and some 160 amateur theatrical performance teams and Tibetan opera teams at the county level. These teams always perform for the people of the farming and pastoral areas, and are very popular there. Many of their performances have won awards at national or regional theatrical festivals. In addition, the various prefectures, cities and counties hold mass theatrical festivals from time to time to promote popular cultural activities. On the traditional Tibetan Shoton Festival in recent years, Tibetan opera and song and dance performances have been given in Tibet, together with a wide range of other colorful traditional cultural activities of popular appeal. Lhozhag County, Biru County, Chenggo Township in Gonggar County, Jiongriwuqi Township in Ngamring County and Gyangze County, which are famous for their Tibetan opera, song and dance performances, folk plastic art, folk dances, Tibetan opera and Tibetan carpets, respectively, have received official recognition from the state, which invested over 2.6 million yuan to construct the state-level cultural garden for rural children in Doilungdeqen County and established the Tibet Children's Art Ensemble in 1996. The Tibet Children's Art Ensemble has performed twice in Beijing, and participated in the International Children's Art Festival in the United States in 1998, both times with great success. From 1995 to 1999, a total of 40 professional and amateur art ensembles made up of 360 people were sent by the Tibet Autonomous Region to perform or hold exhibitions in or conduct academic exchanges with more than 20 countries and regions worldwide, and wherever they went, they were enthusiastically welcomed.
藏学研究全面展开，藏医藏药重放异彩
     Tibetan Studies Are Flourishing, and Tibetan Medicine and Pharmacology Have Taken On a New Lease of Life
旧西藏没有任何现代意义的藏学研究。如今西藏的藏学研究已取得很大进展。藏学已成为一门公认的世界性新兴学科，受到国际学术界的高度重视。它大大突破了藏族传统文化“大小五明”的范围，涵盖了政治、经济、历史、文学艺术、宗教、哲学、语言文字、地理、教育以及考古、民俗、藏医藏药、天文历算和生态保护、经济可持续发展、农业、牧业等社会科学和自然科学的大部分基本学科，成为对西藏社会进行全面研究的一个宏大的学科体系。据统计，中国现有50余家藏学研究机构，1000多名专家学者。
Old Tibet had no Tibetan studies in the modern sense. But today, great progress has been made in Tibetan studies in Tibet, and Tibetology has been universally acknowledged as a newly developed discipline worldwide, being highly valued in international academic circles. It covers most of the basic subjects in the social and natural sciences, including political science, economics, history, literature and art, religion, philosophy, spoken and written language, geography, education, archeology, folk customs, Tibetan medicine and pharmacology, astronomy, the calendar, ecological protection, sustainable economic development, and agriculture and animal husbandry, breaking the narrow bounds of the "Five Major and Five Minor Treatises of Buddhist Doctrine" of traditional Tibetan culture. Thus Tibetology has become a grand system of comprehensive studies of Tibetan society. According to statistics, there are over 50 institutions of Tibetan studies and more than 1,000 experts and scholars in this field in China at present.
西藏的藏学研究是从和平解放后开始起步的。七十年代起，西藏陆续组建了以西藏社会科学院为代表的一批藏学研究专门机构。在过去的几年里，西藏社会科学院先后完成了《西藏通史》(藏、汉文)、《夏格巴——西藏政治史(批注)》、《西藏古代近代交通史》(汉文)、《藏族哲学的理智》(藏文)、《西藏哲学词典》(藏文)、《藏学文献目录索引》等一批重要专著的编写，在藏学研究方面取得了突破性的进展。《西藏研究》已成为全国中文期刊社科类百种优秀期刊之一。特别是近几年来，西藏社会科学研究事业获得了空前发展，涌现出了一批有成就的专家、学者，很多科研成果不断地填补藏学研究领域各专业的重大学术空白，为整理、发掘、抢救藏民族珍贵历史文化遗产，继承、弘扬藏民族优秀传统文化，丰富中华民族传统文化宝库作出了重要贡献。
Tibetan studies in Tibet started after the peaceful liberation of the region in 1951. A number of special organizations on Tibetan studies have been established in Tibet since the 1970s, represented by the Tibet Academy of Social Sciences. In the past few years, the Academy has made a breakthrough in Tibetan studies by completing a sequence of important monographs, including A General History of Tibet (Tibetan and Chinese editions), A Political History of Tibet by Xagaba (Annotated), A Communications History of Ancient and Modern Tibet (Chinese edition), The Reasoning Theory in Tibetan Philosophy (Tibetan edition), A Dictionary of Tibetan Philosophy (Tibetan edition), and Index of the Catalogues of Tibetan Studies Documents. Tibetan Studies has become one of the 100 leading Chinese periodicals on the social sciences. Especially in recent years, unprecedented development has been made in social sciences research in Tibet, a great number of experts and scholars with outstanding accomplishments have emerged, and many scientific research achievements have filled important academic gaps in various fields of Tibetan studies, making important contributions to collating, exploring and saving the precious Tibetan historical and cultural heritage, promoting and carrying forward the fine aspects of traditional Tibetan culture, and enriching the treasure-house of traditional Chinese culture.
藏学汉文文献史料的搜集、整理工作也取得巨大成绩，目前已编辑出版了200多部共500多万册，在国内外产生了巨大影响，为研究藏学及汉藏关系史、中央政府和西藏地方关系史提供了丰富的佐证和可信的史料。同时，藏学界与国外开展了广泛的学术交流与合作，先后接待了国外专家学者200多人，并经常派出专家学者出国讲学，开展合作研究。
Great achievements have also been made in the collection and collation of Chinese documents and historical materials relating to Tibetan studies. A total of over 200 works in more than five million copies have been compiled and published, producing a great impact both at home and abroad, and providing rich evidence and reliable historical materials for research in Tibetology, the history of Han-Tibetan relations, and the history of the relations between the central and Tibetan local authorities. Extensive academic exchanges and cooperation have been carried out between Tibetologists in China and foreign countries, with China receiving more than 200 foreign experts and scholars, and often sending experts and scholars to other countries to give lectures and carry out cooperative research.
藏医藏药具有突出的藏民族特色，在藏族传统文化中占有重要的地位，在中华民族医药学宝库中独树一帜。然而，在1959年前，西藏的医疗机构仅有拉萨“门孜康”(即藏医星算学院)和药王山医学利众院两所，门诊建筑面积总共才500平方米，从业人员不足50人，条件十分简陋，日门诊量30—50人次，主要是为贵族、领主和上层喇嘛服务的。
Tibetan medicine and pharmacology, with distinctive Tibetan characteristics, occupies an important position in traditional Tibetan culture, and forms a unique part of the treasure-house of Chinese medicine and pharmacology. However, there were only two medical organs in Tibet before 1959-the "Mantsikhang" (Institute of Tibetan Medicine and Astrology) and the "Chakpori Zhopanling" (Medicine King Hill Institute for Saving All Living Beings) in Lhasa, the conditions at which were very simple and crude. They had a combined floor space of only 500 square meters for the outpatient clinics and a total staff of fewer than 50. They handled 30-50 outpatients a day, and mainly served the nobles, feudal lords and upper-strata lamas.
西藏实行民主改革40多年来，国家拨款8亿多元发展西藏的藏医藏药事业，促进了藏医藏药的蓬勃发展。目前，西藏的藏医机构已发展到14所，同时还有60多个县医院的藏医科。1959年，西藏各类藏医药人员只有434人，而到1999年，西藏在编藏医药从业人员已发展到1071名，其中主任、副主任医师61名，主治医师166名，医师和医士844名。由“门孜康”和“药王山医学利众院”合并发展而成的西藏自治区藏医院，现有建筑面积十几万平方米，工作人员438人，其中卫生技术人员290人，病床250张，对广大藏族群众实行免费医疗政策，年门诊量达23万人次。该院建立了门诊部、住院部、制药厂和藏医研究所、天文历算研究所，设有内科、外科、妇产科、肿瘤科、胃肠病科、小儿科等门诊科室，还建立了预防保健、口腔、眼科、藏医外治科等20多个专科门诊，并设有放射、检验、B超、心电、胃镜等现代化的医技科室，除采用传统藏医医疗手段治疗疾病外，还采用西医与藏医相结合的方法治疗疾病，丰富和发展了藏医诊治手法和理论。
The state has allocated over 800 million yuan to promote the development of Tibetan medicine and pharmacology since Tibet carried out the Democratic Reform over 40 years ago, giving a great boost to this sector. At present, there are a total of 14 Tibetan medical institutions in Tibet, and over 60 county-level hospitals have established Tibetan medicine sections. In 1959, the working personnel involved in Tibetan medicine in Tibet numbered only 434, while in 1999 the number had increased to 1,071, including 61 chief physicians and associate chief physicians, 166 attending physicians and 844 resident physicians and doctors. The "Mantsikhang" and "Chakpori Zhopanling" have been amalgamated to become the Tibet Autonomous Regional Hospital of Tibetan Medicine, with a floor space of over 100,000 square meters and a staff of 438, of whom 290 are health technicians. The hospital has 250 beds and provides free medical care for the broad masses of the Tibetan people, receiving 230,000 outpatients annually. The hospital has set up outpatient and inpatient departments, a pharmaceuticals factory, and research institutes of Tibetan medicine, astronomy and the calendar. It has a department of medicine, surgical department, department of gynecology and obstetrics, tumor department, gastrointestinal department and department of pediatrics to cater to outpatients. In addition, it has set up more than 20 special outpatient departments, such as the department for disease prevention and health protection, oral hygiene department, ophthalmological department and department of external Tibetan therapeutic medicine, and some modern medical and technical departments such as the departments of radiation, ultrasonic wave examination, electrocardioscopy and gastroscopy. The hospital has adopted the method of combining Western and Tibetan medicine to treat diseases, thereby enriching and developing Tibetan medical therapies and theories.
藏医药学科学研究和教育工作得到重视。各级藏医机构积极开展藏医药科学研究，搜集整理近百部藏医学文献、专著，在继承前辈藏医学家的实践经验和理论精华的基础上，在藏医史、藏医药文献、医药学理论、医德与师承、藏医本草等方面的研究都有新的成果问世。《四部医典》(藏汉文版)、《蓝琉璃》、《四部医典系列挂图全集》、《藏医诊断学》、《藏医新剂学》、《藏医名医列传》等32部专著已付梓出版。西藏藏医学院建立10年来共输送各级各类藏医药人才615名。藏药生产走上标准化、规范化和科学化的管理轨道。目前西藏有10多家藏药制药厂，其中自治区藏药厂拥有两条生产线，产品共有110多种，年产值4610万元。
Due attention has been paid to scientific research and education concerning Tibetan medicine. Tibetan medical institutions at all levels are actively carrying out scientific research on Tibetan medicine, and have collected and collated nearly 100 related documents and monographs. New achievements have been made in studies relating to the history of Tibetan medicine, medical documents, pharmacological theories, medical ethics, the inheritance of the teachings of the masters, and Tibetan materia medica. Thirty-two monographs have been published, including the Four Medical Classics (Tibetan-Chinese bilingual edition), Blue Glaze, A Complete Collection of Wall Charts of the Four Medical Classics, Diagnostics of Tibetan Medicine, Newly Compiled Tibetan Medicaments and Biographies of Famous Tibetan Doctors. The College of Tibetan Medicine has trained 615 qualified personnel of various levels and categories since it was established 10 years ago. The production of Tibetan medicine has been put on a standardized, normalized and scientific administration track. The Tibetan Pharmaceuticals Factory of the Tibet Autonomous Region, one of a dozen similar factories in Tibet, has two production lines, turning out over 110 varieties of products and boasting an annual output value of 46.1 million yuan.
藏医药正在走向世界，引起国际医学界的关注。每年有大批外国专家、学者到西藏考察藏医学，美、英、德等国还引进了藏医藏药，一些国家派出留学生到西藏学习。随着时代的发展和进步，藏医药学这门古老的科学，正在焕发出勃勃生机，为提高西藏人民的身体健康水平，造福人类，发挥着重要的作用。
Tibetan medicine is now taking its place in the world, arousing the attention of international medical circles. Many foreign experts and scholars come to Tibet every year to study Tibetan medicine. Tibetan medicine and pharmacology has also been introduced to the United States, Britain and Germany, and some countries have sent students to Tibet to study Tibetan medicine. With the development and progress of the times, the old science of Tibetan medicine and pharmacology is now full of vigor and vitality, playing an important role in improving the health conditions of the Tibetan people and bringing benefits to mankind as a whole.
人民教育事业实现历史性跨越
     Popular Education Makes a Historic Leap
旧西藏没有一所近代意义的学校。寺院垄断着教育，仅有的极少数官办的僧官和俗官学校，绝大多数学生是贵族子弟。广大农奴根本没有接受教育的机会，文盲占95%。1937年国民政府教育部开办的国立拉萨小学，盛时学生也不足300人，办学10多年，仅有12人高小毕业。
There were no proper schools in old Tibet. Monasteries monopolized education, and there were only a few government schools for training only clerical and secular officials, where most of the students were children of the nobility. The masses of serfs and slaves had no chance to receive education at all and illiterate persons accounted for 95 percent of their total number. Less than 300 students studied in the state-run Lhasa Primary School, which was established by the Ministry of Education of the National Government in 1937, even during its period of full bloom, and only 12 students graduated from higher primary school during its 10 or so years of operation.
西藏实行民主改革以来，西藏自治区人民政府一直把发展人民教育事业，提高藏民族整体科学文化素质作为一个重要任务。为依法保障人民的受教育权利，西藏自治区于1994年颁布实施了《西藏自治区义务教育办法》和《西藏自治区义务教育规划》，同时在资金投入上对教育实行倾斜政策，明确规定自治区年度财政预算和年度基本建设投资计划中教育部分所占的比例均要达到17%。1990—1995年，自治区地方预算内教育事业费累计投入10.3亿元。目前，西藏已初步形成了比较完备的教育体系，教职员工已达到22279人，其中专职教师19276人，以藏族为主的少数民族师资占80%以上。
The People's Government of the Tibet Autonomous Region has always regarded it as an important task to develop popular education to enhance the scientific and cultural qualities of all the Tibetans since Tibet carried out the Democratic Reform. To guarantee the people's right to receive education in accordance with the law, the autonomous region promulgated for implementation the Measures of Compulsory Education in the Tibet Autonomous Region and A Plan for Compulsory Education in Tibet Autonomous Region in 1994, and adopted a policy which favored investment in education, providing in explicit terms that the proportion of education to either its annual financial budget or annual investment plan in capital construction should reach 17 percent. The investment in education within the local budget totaled 1.03 billion yuan from 1990 to 1995. At present, a fairly complete educational system has taken initial shape in Tibet. The teaching and administrative staff have reached 22,279, among whom 19,276 are full-time teachers, and the teachers of ethnic minorities, with most being Tibetans, account for over 80 percent.
西藏的教育事业发展迅速。据统计，目前西藏已拥有中学101所，小学820所，教学点3033个，中小学在校生354644人，其中区内初中在校生34756人，普通高中在校生9451人。西藏的适龄儿童入学率达到83.4%，实现了在牧区普及三年义务教育、农区普及六年义务教育、主要城镇普及九年义务教育。同时，建立了16所中等专业学校，在区内外学习的中等专业学校学生达到8161人。随着成人教育的发展，西藏的青壮年文盲率由1951年前的95%下降到1999年的42%。高等教育发展很快，先后创办了西藏民族学院、西藏农牧学院、西藏大学、西藏藏医学院4所高等院校，现有在校学生共计5249人。
Education in Tibet has made great strides. According to statistics, Tibet now boasts 820 primary schools, 101 middle schools and 3,033 teaching centers, with a total enrollment of 354,644 in primary and middle schools, including 34,756 junior middle school students and 9,451 senior middle school students within the region itself. The enrollment ratio of school-age children has reached 83.4 percent. A three-year compulsory education system has been popularized in pastoral areas; in agricultural areas, six years; and in major cities and towns, nine years. Sixteen secondary vocational schools have been set up in the region, and the number of students attending such schools both within and outside Tibet has reached 8,161. With the development of adult education, the illiteracy rate of Tibetan young and middle-aged people declined from 95 percent before 1951 to 42 percent in 1999. Higher education has also been developed rapidly. Tibet has now established four universities-the Tibet Ethnic Institute, Tibet Institute of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, Tibet University, and Tibet College of Tibetan Medicine, with a total enrollment of 5,249.
几十年来，西藏已培养大学毕业生2万余人，中专毕业生2.3万余人，有了一批藏族博士、硕士，并已拥有一大批藏族科学家、工程师、教授、名医、文学艺术家等专业人才。
In the last few decades in Tibet, over 20,000 students have graduated from universities, and more than 23,000 from secondary vocational schools. Some Tibetans have received master's or doctor's degrees. A large number of Tibetan professionals have thus been trained, including scientists, engineers, professors, doctors, writers and artists.
新闻出版和广播影视事业发展迅速
     The News and Publishing, Broadcasting, Film and Television Industries Are Developing Rapidly
西藏和平解放前，没有现代意义上的新闻出版事业，仅有的若干个木刻印经院印出的几乎是清一色的经书。西藏和平解放以来，西藏的新闻出版业从无到有逐步发展。特别近20年来，图书、报刊、音像出版业发展迅速，现已初步形成了一个遍布全区的新闻出版体系。
There was no genuine news and publishing industry in Tibet before its peaceful liberation, and the materials printed by the few wood-block printing houses were almost all scriptures. Tibet's news and publishing industry has grown gradually from nothing since its peaceful liberation. Especially in the past 20 years, the publishing of books, newspapers and audio-visual materials has made rapid progress, and a news and publishing system covering the whole region has already taken initial shape.
出版事业繁荣发展。西藏先后建立了4家出版社和1家音像复录加工厂。西藏人民出版社成立近30年来，共出版图书6600余种，发行7890余万册，其中藏文图书占80%左右，有近百种图书先后获全国和地区性奖励。目前，西藏有包括西藏新华印刷厂在内的各类印刷厂25个，电子排版、平版胶印、电子分色、多色印刷等新技术逐步进入印刷企业。西藏和平解放前根本没有现代意义上的图书发行事业，如今已有自治区、地市、县三级新华书店67个，基本形成了覆盖全区的图书发行网络，近20年来为广大藏族读者提供各种藏文图书8000多种共9000多万册。报刊出版事业稳步发展。从1956年《西藏日报》创刊、1977年《西藏文艺》创刊发展到现在，西藏公开发行的报刊已达52种。
Publishing is flourishing. Tibet has established four publishing houses and an audio-visual products duplication and manufacturing plant. The Tibet People's Publishing House has published over 6,600 titles of books, with a total distribution of over 78.9 million copies since it was founded some 30 years ago, among which Tibetan-language books accounted for approximately 80 percent, and nearly 100 titles won national or regional prizes. At present, the region has the Tibet Xinhua Printing House and another 24 printing houses, and new technologies have been gradually introduced to printing enterprises, such as electronic composition, offset lithography, electronic color separation and polychrome printing. There was no system of book distribution in Tibet before its peaceful liberation. But now, the region has 67 Xinhua bookstores at regional, prefectural (city) and county levels. A network of book distribution covering the whole region is now basically in place, offering a total of 90-odd million Tibetan-language books in over 8,000 titles to the masses of Tibetan readers over the past 20 years. The publishing of newspapers and periodicals has also been developed steadily. The Tibet Daily started publication in 1956, and Tibetan Literature and Art in 1977. Now, a total of 52 newspapers and periodicals are published for the general public in Tibet.
西藏广播影视事业也是在和平解放后逐渐发展起来的。1953年建立拉萨有线广播站；1958年开始播出无线广播；1959年西藏人民广播电台正式成立；1978年试播黑白电视节目；1979年试播彩色电视节目；1985年西藏电视台正式成立；1995年西藏广播电视译制制作中心工程投入使用。40多年来，国家和自治区用于西藏广播影视业建设的资金达5.3亿元，中央和全国各兄弟省(市)还支援了大量的器材和物资，支援的技术人员和干部有5批200多人，并为西藏培养了大批广播影视专业人才。目前，西藏已有广播电台2座、中短波广播发射台和转播台36座、县级调频转播台45座、无线电视台2座、电视转播台354座；卫星地面站1475座。广播和电视的人口覆盖率分别达到65%和55%。拉萨市及周边地区的电视人口覆盖率达75%。电影是西藏广大农牧区目前主要的文化活动之一。西藏现有电影院436个，基层电影放映队650个，放映点9300多个，年放映13万多场，观众达2850万人次，农牧民群众人均每月至少能观看一场电影。在广大农牧区实现了电影藏语化，基本解决了农牧民看电影的问题。广播影视已成为西藏各族人民文化生活中不可缺少的重要内容。
Tibet's broadcasting, film and television industries have also been developed gradually since its peaceful liberation. The Lhasa Cable Broadcasting Station was established in 1953; wireless broadcasting was started in 1958; the Tibet People's Broadcasting Station was formally founded in 1959; black-and-white and color television programs were trial-broadcasted in 1978 and 1979, respectively; the Tibet Television was established formally in 1985; and the project of the Production Center of the Tibet Dubbed Radio and Television Programs was put in use in 1995. In the last four decades and more, the state and the autonomous region have invested a total of 530 million yuan in Tibet's radio, film and television industries. The Central Government as well as provinces and municipalities have also given their support to Tibet by supplying it with a large number of equipment and materials, more than 200 technicians and cadres in five groups, and training a galaxy of broadcasting, film and television professionals for it. At present, Tibet has two radio broadcasting stations, 36 medium- and short-wave radio transmitting and relay stations, 45 county-level FM relay stations, two wireless television stations, 354 television relay stations and 1,475 ground satellite stations, bringing radio and TV programs to 65 and 55 percent of the people in Tibet, respectively, and TV programs to 75 percent of the residents in Lhasa and its vicinity. Seeing films is one of the main cultural activities of the broad masses of people in agricultural and pastoral areas. Tibet now has 436 cinemas, 650 grassroots film projection teams and over 9,300 projection centers, giving more than 130,000 movie shows to 28.5 million people annually, averaging at least one show per farmer or herdsman per month. Films are dubbed in Tibetan in agricultural and pastoral areas so that farmers and herdsmen can understand them. Radio, film and television have become indispensable parts of the cultural lives of the people of various ethnic groups in Tibet.
结　束　语
    Conclusion
40多年来，西藏文化在继承传统优秀文化和保持藏民族文化特色的基础上得到了巨大的发展。这种发展突出地表现在：一是西藏文化的主体发生了根本变化，彻底改变了极少数封建农奴主垄断西藏文化的局面，西藏全体人民成为共同继承、发展和分享西藏文化的主体；二是西藏文化的内涵发生了深刻的变化，一些与封建农奴制相伴随的腐朽、落后的东西随着社会的进步与发展而被抛弃，藏族信教群众的宗教信仰得到充分的尊重和保护，藏族传统优秀文化得到妥善保护和继承，并被赋予反映人民群众新生活和社会发展新需要的时代内容，在内容和形式上都得到了不断弘扬和发展；三是西藏文化的发展态势发生了实质性的变化，打破了封闭、停滞和萎缩状态，形成了面向现代化、面向世界的开放和发展态势，在传统文化得到弘扬的同时，现代科技教育和新闻传播文化从无到有，获得了空前发展。
Over the past four decades and more, Tibet has made much headway in carrying forward the fine aspects of its traditional culture, while maintaining Tibetan cultural traits, which is revealed prominently in the following aspects: First, the main body of Tibetan culture, which was monopolized by a small handful of feudal serf-owners in the past, has been changed completely, and the entire Tibetan people have become the main body jointly carrying forward and developing Tibetan culture and sharing its fruits; second, Tibetan culture has undergone deep changes-with social progress and development, decadent and backward things inherent in feudal serfdom have been abandoned, the religious beliefs of Tibetan religious followers enjoy full respect and protection, and the fine aspects of traditional Tibetan culture have been carefully preserved and carried forward. Improvement has been steadily made both in its contents and forms, adding some topical contents to reflect the new life of the people and the new needs of social development; and third, a substantive shift has taken place in the development stance of Tibetan culture, from the self-enclosed, stagnating and shrinking situation to a new stance-the stance of opening-up and development oriented to modernization and the outside world. While developing and promoting its traditional culture, Tibet is also developing modern scientific and technological education and news dissemination at an unprecedented rate.
令人深思的是，在西藏文化不断发展的今天，达赖集团却在国际上到处散布和大肆鼓噪“西藏的文化遭到了灭绝”，并在一些国际敌对势力的支持下借此不断掀起反华舆论。从西藏民主改革40多年来的历史可以清楚地看出，达赖集团所谓的“文化灭绝”不是别的，恰恰是西藏文化真正的发展。
It deserves careful reflection that, although Tibetan culture is developing continuously, the Dalai Lama clique is clamoring all over the world that "Tibetan culture has become extinct," and, on this pretext, is whipping up anti-China opinions with the backing of international antagonist forces. From the 40-odd years of history following the Democratic Reform in Tibet it can be clearly perceived that what the Dalai clique is aiming at is nothing but hampering the real development of Tibetan culture.
首先，文化属于社会的意识形态，它是随着社会的经济基础和上层建筑的其他部分的变化而变化发展的。现代西方文化的形成和发展，是与消灭中世纪封建农奴制和政教合一的专制制度的近代欧洲资产阶级革命以及与之相伴随的宗教改革和思想文化领域的巨大变革分不开的。同样，西藏40多年来文化的发展是在消灭比欧洲中世纪还要黑暗的政教合一的封建农奴制这样一个巨大的社会变革的条件下出现的。随着封建农奴制的消灭，由极少数农奴主垄断西藏文化这种与旧制度相伴随的文化特性势必遭到“灭绝”，政教合一、由宗教支配整个社会政治生活这种旧的文化专制主义也势必遭到“灭绝”，这是西藏历史发展的必然，也是西藏文化发展的必然。因为没有这种“灭绝”，西藏社会和西藏文化就无法得到解放和发展，西藏广大人民就不可能获得掌握和分享西藏文化发展成果的权利，西藏人民的宗教信仰就不可能变成个人的私事，获得真正的自由。但是，这种“灭绝”对于封建农奴制的总代表达赖集团来说却是致命的，是他们的文化统治权的灭绝。他们因此大叫“西藏传统文化遭到了灭绝”也就不足为奇了。
First, as a social ideology, culture varies with the changes in the other parts of the social economic foundation and superstructure. The formation and development of modern Western culture are inseparable from the modern European bourgeois revolution, in which the dictatorial system of feudal serfdom and theocracy in the Middle Ages was eliminated, along with the religious reforms and great changes in the ideological and cultural fields caused by it. The development of Tibetan culture in the last four decades and more has been achieved in the course of the same great social change marked by the elimination of feudal serfdom under theocracy that was even darker than the European system in the Middle Ages. With the elimination of feudal serfdom, the cultural characteristics under the old system, in which Tibetan culture was monopolized by a few serf-owners was bound to become "extinct," and so was the old cultural autocracy marked by theocracy and the domination of the entire spectrum of socio-political life by religion, which was an inevitable outcome of both the historical and cultural development in Tibet. Because without such "extinction," it would be impossible to emancipate and develop Tibetan society and culture, the ordinary Tibetan people would be unable to obtain the right of mastering and sharing the fruits of Tibet's cultural development, and it would be impossible for them to enjoy real freedom, for their religious beliefs would not be regarded as personal affairs. However, such "extinction" was fatal to the Dalai Lama clique, the chief representatives of feudal serfdom, for it meant the extinction of their cultural rule. Therefore, it is not surprising at all that they clamor about the "extinction of traditional Tibetan culture."
其次，一种文化的发展从来不是孤立进行的，它势必随着时代的进步和社会的发展而不断获得新的内容和形式，势必在与其他文化的相互融合和吸收中不断滋养和丰富自己。西藏文化40多年的发展就是西藏社会逐步摆脱愚昧落后走向改革开放和现代化的过程中，在与现代文明包括现代西方文明的相互融合和吸收中实现的。随着西藏生产方式、生活方式的变化，人们的思维方式和思想观念也必然发生变化。在这一过程中，一些西藏传统文化中所没有而为现代文明生活所必需的新文化如现代科技教育和新闻传播等得到发展，一些具有藏民族特色的优秀文化传统在新时代下得到弘扬和光大，同时，一些传统文化中与社会发展和人民生活不相适应的陈腐、落后的东西逐渐被淘汰，这是符合文化发展规律的自然现象，也正是西藏文化在新形势下不断繁荣发展的表现。因为西藏文化获得新的时代内容、取得进步和发展而指责“西藏文化灭绝”，其实质是要求现代西藏人民原封不动地保留旧西藏封建农奴制下的生活方式和文化价值，是完全违背时代进步潮流和西藏人民的根本利益的，也是极端荒谬的。
Second, the development of a culture has never been achieved in isolation, and it is bound to acquire new contents and forms ceaselessly with the progress of the times and development of the society, and nourish and enrich itself while adapting to and absorbing other cultures. The development of Tibetan culture in the last four decades and more has been achieved while Tibetan society is gradually putting an end to ignorance and backwardness, and heading for reform, opening-up and modernization, and while Tibetan culture and modern civilization, including modern Western civilization, are absorbing and blending with each other. The people's mode of thinking and concepts are bound to change with the changes of the modes of production and life in Tibet. During this process, some new aspects of culture which are not contained in the traditional Tibetan culture but are essential in modern civilization have been developed, such as modern scientific and technological education and news dissemination. The fine cultural traditions with Tibetan features are being carried forward and promoted in the new age, and the decayed and backward things in the traditional culture that are not adapted to social development and people's life are being gradually sifted out. It is a natural phenomenon in conformity with the law of cultural development, and a manifestation of the unceasing prosperity and development of Tibetan culture in the new situation. To prattle about the "extinction of Tibetan culture" due to its acquisition of the new contents of the new age and to its progress and development is in essence to demand that modern Tibetan people keep the life styles and cultural values of old Tibet's feudal serfdom wholly intact. This is completely ridiculous, for it goes against the tide of progress of the times and the fundamental interests of the Tibetan people.
当前，人类已经迈入新的千年，经济全球化和社会生活信息化发展迅速，正在日益改变着人类的物质文化生活。随着中国改革开放和现代化建设的深入发展，特别是随着西部大开发战略的实施，西藏正以崭新的姿态走向现代化、走向世界，西藏的文化也必将在这一过程中迎来新的更大的发展。
At present, as mankind has marched into the new millennium, economic globalization and informationization in social life are developing rapidly, increasingly changing people's material and cultural lives. With the deepening development of China's reform and opening-up and the modernization drive, especially the practice of the strategy of large-scale development of the western region, Tibet is striding toward modernization and going global with a completely new shape, and new and still greater development will certainly be achieved in Tibetan culture in this process.
                                                           
2000年中国的国防
China's National Defense in 2000
中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China
二000年十月十六日?北京
October 16, 2000, Beijing
目　　录
Contents   
前　　言
Foreword
安全形势
The Security Situation
国防政策
 National Defense Policy
国防建设
 National Defense Construction　　　　
武装力量体制
Structure and Organization of the Armed Forces
国防动员与国防教育
Mobilization and Education
国防费
Defense Expenditure
国防科技工业　　　 
Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense
边防建设
Frontier Defense
驻军澳门
The Macao Garrison
军队建设
  Armed Forces Building
军事法制建设
Military Legal System
裁减军队员额
Downsizing and Restructuring
思想政治建设
Ideological and Political Work
军事训练
Military Training
后勤建设
Logistics
武器装备建设
Weaponry and Equipment
参加国家减灾救灾行动
Disaster Relief
国际安全合作
  International Security Cooperation
军事交往
Military Exchanges

地区安全合作
Regional Security Cooperation
建立信任措施
Confidence-Building Measures
参与联合国维持和平行动
Participation in UN Peace-Keeping Operations
军控与裁军
  Arms Control and Disarmament
核武器和导弹防御问题
Nuclear Weapons and Missile Defense
化学武器和生物武器问题
Chemical and Biological Weapons
防止外空军备竞赛问题
Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space
杀伤人员地雷问题
Anti-Personnel Landmines
常规武器转让登记和小武器问题
The UN Register of Conventional Arms and the Issue of Small Arms

前言
Foreword
世纪交替，千年更迭，人类社会的发展正在揭开新的篇章。
The turn of the century has opened a new chapter in the development of human society.
回首二十世纪，人类创造了前所未有的巨大物质和精神财富，同时也经历了两次世界大战、数百起局部战争以及近半个世纪的冷战，惨遭战争劫难和战争威胁之苦；中华民族历尽磨难，中国人民为国家独立、民族解放和民主自由进行了前仆后继的英勇奋斗，最终使国家走上现代化的发展道路。中国人民深知和平之弥足珍贵。
When we look back on the twentieth century we notice that mankind created enormous material and spiritual wealth never seen before. We also experienced two world wars, hundreds of local wars and the Cold War that lasted for nearly half a century, suffering tremendously from the scourge of wars or the menace of wars. The Chinese nation has gone through many hardships. The Chinese people have fought bravely for their national independence, liberation, democracy and freedom. They have finally brought the country onto the road toward modernization. The Chinese people know full well the value of peace.
即将到来的新世纪，人类既面临难得的发展机遇，又面临严峻的挑战。维护世界和平，促进共同发展，是当今时代的主题和世界各国人民的普遍愿望。中国正在一心一意地进行现代化建设，一个和平的国际环境和良好的周边环境符合中国的根本利益。中国始终不渝地奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，致力于建设一个和平、稳定、繁荣、发展的新世界。中国坚定不移地实行防御性的国防政策，坚决维护国家的主权、统领土完整和安全。中国人民愿同世界上一切爱好和平的人民一道，为世界的和平与发展，为人类更加美好的未来，贡献自己的智慧和力量。
Humanity is facing a rare chance for development as well as tough challenges in the new century. To safeguard world peace and promote the development of all are the themes of the times and the common aspirations of people all over the world. China is engaged wholeheartedly in its modernization drive. A peaceful international environment and a favorable surrounding environ- ment serve China's fundamental interests. China steadfastly follows an independent foreign policy of peace and is committed to a new world of peace, stability, prosperity and development. China firmly pursues a defensive national defense policy and is determined to safeguard its state sovereignty, national unity, territorial integrity and security. The Chinese people are ready to work together with other peace-loving people of the world and contribute their wisdom and strength to world peace and development, and a more beautiful future for mankind.
在世纪之交的重要历史时刻，为表达中国人民热爱和平的真诚愿望，使世人对中国的国防政策和国防现代化建设情况有更加全面的认识和了解，现发表《2000年中国的国防》白皮书。
At this important point in history - the turn of the century - we publish this white paper, China's National Defense in 2000, to express the Chinese people's sincere aspirations for peace and to help the rest of the world better understand China's national defense policy and its efforts for the modernization of its national defense.
安全形势
    The Security Situation
和平与发展仍然是当今世界的两大主题。世界多极化和经济全球化趋势深入发展，国际安全形势总体上继续趋向缓和。大国关系复杂，多种矛盾斗争交织，但相互借重、相互合作、相互制约的基本特征没有改变。广大发展中国家具有巨大的发展潜力，是国际舞台上推动建立公正合理的国际新秩序、促进世界和平与发展的一支重要力量。科技进步日新月异，国际间经济联系不断加强，各国仍把发展经济、创新科技和提高综合国力放在首位。世界和平的力量超过战争的力量，在相当长的时期内，新的世界大战不会发生。
Peace and development remain the two major themes in today's world. The trend toward multi-polarity and economic globalization is gaining momentum, and the international secu- rity situation, in general, continues to tend toward relaxation. Relations among big powers are complicated, with many interwoven contradictions and frictions. However, drawing on each other's strength, cooperating with and checking and constraining each other remain a basic feature of their rela- tionship. The vast number of developing countries, with great potential for growth, are an important force in promoting the establishment of a fair and reasonable new international order, and in safeguarding world peace and development. Science and technology are making progress with each passing day, and economic ties between countries have become ever stronger. Economic development, scientific and technological innovation, and the growth of aggregate national strength remain the priorities for many countries. Worldwide, the forces for peace are prevailing over the forces for war. A new world war will not break out for a fairly long time to come.
亚太地区安全形势总体保持稳定。许多亚洲国家特别是东亚国家已摆脱金融危机，经济逐步恢复增长，前景看好。绝大多数国家把振兴经济、加强对话与合作作为主要政策取向，坚持在主权平等和不干涉别国内政等原则基础上发展国家关系。有关国家继续坚持以和平方式解决彼此争端，不断开展多形式、多层次、多渠道的安全对话，增进相互了解与信任。东盟和中国、日本、韩国(10＋3)的合作在经济、金融领域逐步展开。朝鲜半岛紧张局势明显走向缓和。中越签署陆地边界条约。南海地区形势基本保持稳定。
The security situation in the Asia-Pacific region has been on the whole stable. Many Asian countries, particularly the East Asian countries, have tided over the financial crisis and their economies are steadily recovering with bright prospects. It is the policy options of most countries to rejuvenate their economies, and enhance dialogue and cooperation. They will continue to develop state-to-state relations in accordance with such principles as sovereign equality and non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries. A number of countries have consistently stood for peaceful settlement of disputes, and engaged themselves in security dialogues in a variety of forms, at different levels and through different channels. All this has helped enhance mutual understanding and trust. The cooperation among ASEAN, China, Japan and the Republic of Korea (10+3) is steadily developing in the economic and financial field. The tense situation on the Korean Peninsula is markedly easing off. China and Vietnam have signed a land border treaty. The situation in the South China Sea remains generally stable.
但是，世界不稳定和不确定的因素明显增加，天下还很不太平。国际力量对比严重失衡，不公正不合理的国际政治经济旧秩序还没有根本改变，霸权主义、强权政治在国际政治、经济和安全领域依然存在并有新的发展。某些大国推行“新干涉主义”、新“炮舰政策”和新经济殖民主义，严重损害许多国家的主权独立和发展利益，威胁世界和平与国际安全。在处理国际和地区安全事务中，联合国的地位和作用受到严重挑战。一些国家以“人道”和“人权”为借口，公然违背《联合国宪章》和公认的国际关系准则，动辄使用武力或以武力相威胁，特别是北约绕开联合国安理会，向南斯拉夫联盟发动军事攻击，对国际形势和国际关系产生了重大消极影响。军控与裁军领域出现了一系列消极事态，特别是有关国家仍在继续研发和试图建立国家导弹防御系统及战区导弹防御系统，国际社会防扩散和推动裁军进程的努力受到损害。随着现代科学技术和经济全球化趋势的不断发展，国际竞争空前激烈，金融和经济风险增加，经济安全问题为各国所关注。全球范围内特别是南北之间的发展差距和贫富悬殊继续拉大，两极分化状况更趋严重。
However, in today's world, factors that may cause instability and uncertainty have markedly increased. The world is far from peaceful. There is a serious disequilibrium in the relative strength of countries. No fundamental change has been made in the old, unfair and irrational international political and economic order. Hegemony and power politics still exist and are developing further in the international political, economic and security spheres. Certain big powers are pursuing "neo- interventionism," "neo-gunboat policy" and neo-economic colo- nialism, which are seriously damaging the sovereignty, independence and developmental interests of many countries, and threatening world peace and security. The United Nations' authority and role in handling international and regional security affairs are being seriously challenged. Under the pretexts of "humanitarianism" and "human rights," some countries have frequently resorted to the use or threat of force, in flagrant violation of the UN Charter and other universally recognized principles governing international relations. In particular, the NATO, by-passing the UN Security Council, launched military attacks against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, producing an extremely negative impact on the international situation and relations between countries. A series of negative developments have occurred in the area of arms control and disarmament. In particular, a certain country is still continuing its efforts to develop and introduce the National Missile Defense (NMD) and Theater Missile Defense (TMD) systems, which have undermined the international community's efforts to stem the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and to promote disarmament. As modern science and technology and economic globalization continue to develop, competition among countries has become fiercer than ever before. Financial and economic risks are increasing, and economic security has become a concern for all countries. As the gap in development and the disparity between rich and poor countries continue to widen all over the world, particularly between the South and North, polarization has become an increasingly serious problem.
局部战争和武装冲突出现新的起伏，因民族、宗教、领土、资源等因素引发的冲突和战乱不断。一些国家继续扩大军事集团、强化军事同盟和谋求更大军事优势，严重影响了国际安全与稳定。各种分裂势力、恐怖势力和极端势力给国际社会不断带来危害。环境、毒品、难民等全球性问题日益突出。
Local wars and armed conflicts have increased again, with conflicts and turbulence caused by ethnic, religious, territorial, resources or other factors cropping up one after the other. Some countries have continued to enlarge military blocs, strengthen military alliances and seek greater military superiority. This has seriously affected world security and stability. Divisive, terrorist and extremist forces of every description have continued to endanger the international community, and global problems such as the environment, narcotic drugs and refugees have become increasingly prominent.
影响亚太地区安全的消极因素有新的发展。美国进一步强化在本地区的军事存在和双边军事同盟，推动研发并计划在东亚地区部署战区导弹防御系统，以及日本确定“周边事态法”等，违背时代潮流。联合军事演习在本地区有增无减，不利于国家间建立信任。影响朝鲜半岛安全的不确定因素依然存在。南亚地区形势仍不稳定。在南海地区蚕食中国主权权益的事件仍时有发生，有的域外国家也试图插手南海问题。
　There are new negative developments in the security of the Asia-Pacific region. The United States is further strengthening its military presence and bilateral military alliances in this region, advocating the development of the TMD system and planning to deploy it in East Asia. Japan has passed a bill relating to measures in the event of a situation in the areas surrounding Japan. All this goes against the tide of the times. Joint military exercises have increased in the region, to the detriment of trust between countries. The uncertain factors affecting security on the Korean Peninsula continue to exist, and the situation in South Asia remains unstable. Encroach- ments on China's sovereignty and interests in the South China Sea are not infrequent, and some extra-regional countries are attempting to interfere in this issue.
台湾海峡局势复杂、严峻。李登辉悍然抛出所谓“两国论”的分裂主张，台湾当局新领导人对一个中国原则采取回避和模糊的态度，台湾分裂势力图谋以各种形式把台湾从中国分割出去，严重破坏了海峡两岸和平统一的前提和基础。这是造成台湾海峡局势紧张的根本原因。美国不断向台湾出售先进的武器装备，其国内有人企图推动国会通过所谓《加强台湾安全法》，还有人企图将台湾纳入战区导弹防御系统；日美修订的防卫合作新指针，始终不明确承诺不把台湾划入其欲军事介入的“周边安全事态”范围。这些行为助长了台湾分裂势力的气焰，严重损害了中国的主权和安全，危害了亚太地区的和平与稳定。
The Taiwan Straits situation is complicated and grim. Lee Teng-hui flagrantly dished out his "two states" theory in an attempt to split the country. The new leaders of the Taiwan authorities have adopted an evasive and obscure attitude to the one-China principle. Separatist forces in Taiwan are scheming to split the island province from China, in one form or another. This has seriously undermined the preconditions and foundation for peaceful reunification across the Straits. This is the root cause of tension across the Taiwan Straits. The United States has never stopped selling advanced weapons to Taiwan. Some people in the United States have been trying hard to get the Congress to pass the so-called Taiwan Security Enhancement Act. And some are even attempting to incorporate Taiwan into the US TMD system. The newly revised Guidelines for US-Japan Defense Cooperation has failed to explicitly undertake to exclude Taiwan from the scope of "the areas surrounding Japan" referred to in the Japanese security bill that could involve military intervention. These actions have inflated the arrogance of the separatist forces in Taiwan, seriously undermined China's sovereignty and security and imperiled the peace and stability of the Asia-Pacific region.
世界正在发生深刻的变化，变化了的世界需要摒弃冷战思维，建立适应时代需要的新安全观和新的国际政治、经济和安全秩序。新安全观的核心应该是互信、互利、平等、合作。《联合国宪章》、和平共处五项原则和其他公认的国际关系准则，是维护和平的政治基础。互利合作、共同繁荣，是维护和平的经济保障。在平等基础上的对话、协商和谈判，是解决争端、维护和平的正确途径。只有建立新的安全观和公正合理的国际新秩序，才能从根本上使世界和平与国际安全得到保障。
The world is undergoing profound changes which require the discard of the Cold War mentality and the development of a new security concept and a new international political, economic and security order responsive to the needs of our times. The core of the new security concept should be mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and cooperation. The UN Charter, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and other universally recognized principles governing international relations should serve as the political basis for safeguarding peace while mutually beneficial cooperation and common prosperity its economic guarantee. To conduct dialogue, consultation and negotiation on an equal footing is the right way to solve disputes and safeguard peace. Only by developing a new security concept and establishing a fair and reasonable new international order can world peace and security be fundamentally guaranteed.
　　中国的发展与稳定，中国周边地区的和平与繁荣，以及按照和平共处五项原则建立和维护地区安全新秩序，是中国根本利益之所在。中国将继续加强与世界各国的友好合作关系，为维护、促进亚太地区和世界的和平、稳定、繁荣、发展作出不懈努力。
    China's fundamental interests lie in its domestic development and stability, the peace and prosperity of its surrounding regions, and the establishment and maintenance of a new regional security order based on the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. China will continue to develop friendly relations and cooperation with all other countries. It will make unswerving efforts to safeguard and promote the peace, stability, prosperity and development of the Asia-Pacific region in particular and the world in general.
国防政策
     National Defense Policy
中国奉行防御性的国防政策。《中华人民共和国宪法》以及根据宪法所制定的《中华人民共和国国防法》规定，中华人民共和国武装力量的任务是巩固国防，抵抗侵略，保卫祖国，保卫人民的和平劳动，参加国家建设事业，全心全意为人民服务。
China pursues a national defense policy that is defensive in nature. The Constitution of the People's Republic of China (PRC) and the National Defense Law of the PRC, which is enacted in accordance with the Constitution, specify the tasks of the armed forces of the PRC as being to consolidate national defense, resist aggression, defend the motherland, safeguard the people's peaceful labor, participate in national construction and serve the people wholeheartedly.
中国始终把维护国家的主权、统一、领土完整和安全放在第一位，致力于为社会主义现代化建设争取一个良好的国际和平环境和周边环境。中国的发展和强盛不会对任何人构成威胁，而只会促进世界的和平、稳定和发展。永远不称霸，是中国人民对世界的庄严承诺。
China has always attached primary importance to safe- guarding state sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and security, and has been working hard for a peaceful international and a favorable peripheral environment for China's socialist modernization drive. The development and powerfulness of China will constitute no threat to anyone, but will rather promote the world peace, stability and development. Never to seek hegemony is the Chinese people's solemn pledge to the world.
中国的国防政策，主要包括以下内容：
China's defense policy has the following main aspects:
巩固国防，抵抗侵略，制止武装颠覆，保卫国家的主权、统一、领土完整和安全。中国的国防现代化建设完全是为了自卫。中国努力避免和制止战争，努力用和平方式解决国际争端和历史遗留问题。在霸权主义和强权政治依然存在并有新的发展，特别是在国家和平统一的基础遭受严重威胁的情况下，中国必须加强运用军事手段捍卫主权和安全的能力。
- Consolidating national defense, resisting aggression, curbing armed subversion, and defending state sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and security. China's efforts in defense modernization are purely for self-defense. China spares no effort to avoid and curb war, and to solve international disputes and questions left over by history through peaceful means. However, in view of the fact that hegemonism and power politics still exist and are further developing, and in particular, the basis for the country's peaceful reunification is seriously imperiled, China will have to enhance its capability to defend its sovereignty and security by military means.
独立自主、自力更生地建设和巩固国防。中国立足于依靠自己的力量保障国家安全，坚持独立自主地进行国防决策和制定国防发展战略，不与任何国家或国家集团结盟，不参加任何军事集团，自力更生地建设国防科技工业和发展武器装备。
- Building and consolidating national defense independently and through self-reliance. China stresses self-reliance as the basis for safeguarding state security, and insists on making national defense policies and development strategies independently. China does not seek alliance with any country or bloc of countries, nor does it participate in any military bloc. China builds its defense science, technology and industry and develops its weaponry through self-reliance.
贯彻积极防御的军事战略方针。中国在战略上实行防御、自卫和后发制人的原则。这种防御是和平时期努力遏制战争与准备打赢自卫战争的统一，是战争时期战略上的防御与战役战斗上的攻势行动的统一。中国军队立足于用现有武器装备作战，继承和发扬优良传统，适应世界军事领域的深刻变革，做好现代技术特别是高技术条件下的防卫作战准备。
- Implementing the military strategy of active defense. Strategically, China pursues a principle featuring defensive operations, self-defense and gaining mastery by striking only after the enemy has struck. Such defense combines efforts to deter war with preparations to win self-defense wars in time of peace, and strategic defense with operational and tactical offensive operations in time of war. While basing themselves on existing weaponry and carrying forward their fine traditions, China's armed forces seek to adapt to profound changes in the world's military sphere, and prepare for defensive operations under modern, especially high-tech, conditions.
走有中国特色的精兵之路。中国军队按照政治合格、军事过硬、作风优良、纪律严明、保障有力的总要求，加强全面建设，努力建成一支有中国特色的革命化、现代化、正规化的人民军队。中国坚持质量建军、科技强军、依法治军，实现军队由数量规模型向质量效能型、由人力密集型向科技密集型转变，培养高素质军事人才，加强武器装备现代化建设，全面提高军队战斗力。
- Building a lean and strong military force the Chinese way. In line with the general requirements of being qualified politically, competent militarily, and having a fine work style, a strong sense of discipline and adequate logistical support, the Chinese armed forces strive to strengthen their overall development and form a revolutionized, modernized and regularized people's army with Chinese characteristics. China adheres to building the armed forces by enhancing their quality, strengthening the armed forces by relying on science and technology, and managing the armed forces according to law, and is endeavoring to transform its armed forces from a numerically superior to a qualitatively superior type, and from a manpower-intensive to a technology-intensive type, as well as to train high-quality military personnel and improve the modernization level of weaponry in order to comprehensively enhance the armed forces' combat effectiveness.
实行军民结合，全民自卫。中国坚持现代条件下的人民战争思想，实行精干的常备军与强大的国防后备力量相结合。预备役部队和民兵保持适度规模，优化结构，提高训练水平。按照平战结合、军民结合、寓兵于民的方针，普及和加强国防教育，完善国防动员体制，提高国防动员能力。
- Combining the armed forces with the people and practicing self-defense by the whole people. China adheres to the concept of people's war under modern conditions, and exercises the combination of a streamlined standing army with a powerful reserve force for national defense. The reserve force and militia are maintained at an appropriate scale, with an optimized structure and an enhanced level of training. In the light of the principle of combining peacetime footing with wartime footing and the army with the people, and having reserve soldiers among the people, China works hard to popularize and promote defense education, perfect the defense mobilization system and enhance the defense mobilization capacity.
国防建设服从和服务于国家经济建设大局，国防建设与经济建设协调发展。发展经济和加强国防，是中国现代化建设的两大战略任务。国家坚持以经济建设为中心，国防建设服从和服务于这个大局。同时，国家必须随着经济的发展而努力增强国防实力，大力支持军队加强质量建设，形成国防建设和经济建设相互促进、协调发展的机制。
- Subordinating national defense to, and placing it in the service of, the nation's overall economic construction, and achieving their coordinated development. Developing the economy and strengthening national defense are two strategic tasks in China's modernization efforts. The Chinese government insists that economic development be taken as the center, while defense work be subordinate to and in the service of the nation's overall economic construction. Meanwhile, along with economic development, the state strives to enhance its national defense strength, to effectively support the armed forces in their efforts to improve their quality and to form a mechanism which enables national defense and economic development to promote each other and develop in harmony.
维护世界和平，反对侵略扩张。中国坚决反对霸权主义和强权政治，反对战争政策、侵略政策和扩张政策，反对任何国家以任何形式把自己的政治制度和意识形态强加于别国。中国不搞军事扩张，不在国外驻军或建立军事基地，反对军备竞赛。中国支持国际社会为维护世界和地区和平、安全、稳定所作的努力。
- Safeguarding world peace, and opposing aggression and expansion. China resolutely opposes hegemonism and power politics, and combats the policies of war, aggression and expansion. China also objects to any country imposing in any form its own political system and ideology on other countries. China does not seek military expansion, nor does it station troops or set up military bases in any foreign country. China opposes arms race, and supports the international community in its efforts to promote world and regional peace, security and stability.
中国拥有少量核武器完全是出于自卫的需要。中国承诺不首先使用核武器，不对无核武器国家使用或威胁使用核武器。中国不参加核军备竞赛，也从不在国外部署核武器。中国保持精干有效的核反击力量，是为了遏制他国对中国可能的核攻击，任何此种行为都将导致中国的报复性核反击。中国核武器的数量一直维持在较低水平，其规模、结构组成和发展与中国的积极防御军事战略方针相一致。中国的核武装力量直接由中央军事委员会指挥。中国对核武器的管理采取极为慎重、负责的态度，建立了严格的规章制度和防范措施，确保了核武器的安全可靠。
China possesses a small number of nuclear weapons entirely for self-defense. China undertakes not to be the first to use nuclear weapons, and not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states. China does not participate in any nuclear arms race, and never deploys any nuclear weapons beyond its borders. China maintains a small but effective nuclear counterattacking force in order to deter possible nuclear attacks by other countries. Any such attack will inevitably result in a retaliatory nuclear counterstrike by China. China has always kept the number of its nuclear weapons at a low level. The scale, composition and development of China's nuclear force are in line with China's military strategy of active defense. China's nuclear force is under the direct command of the Central Military Commission (CMC). China is extremely cautious and responsible in the management of its nuclear weapons, and has established strict rules and regulations and taken effective measures to ensure the safety and security of its nuclear weapons.
解决台湾问题，实现中国完全统一，是中华民族的根本利益。中国政府解决台湾问题的基本方针是“和平统一、一国两制”，并贯彻发展两岸关系、推进祖国和平统一进程的八项主张。中国政府始终如一地坚持一个中国的原则，在关系到主权和领土完整的根本问题上，绝不会让步和妥协。台湾地区领导人的更替改变不了台湾是中国领土一部分的事实。解决台湾问题完全是中国内政，中国政府坚决反对任何国家向台湾出售武器或与台湾进行任何形式的军事结盟，反对任何形式的外来干涉。中国政府尽一切可能争取和平统一，主张通过在一个中国原则基础上的对话与谈判解决分歧。但是，如果出现台湾被以任何名义从中国分割出去的重大事变，如果外国侵占台湾，如果台湾当局无限期地拒绝通过谈判和平解决两岸统一问题，中国政府只能被迫采取一切可能的断然措施，包括使用武力，来维护中国的主权和领土完整，实现国家的统一大业。“台湾独立”就意味着重新挑起战争，制造分裂就意味着不要两岸和平。中国人民解放军坚定不移地以国家意志为最高意志，以民族利益为最高利益，完全有决心、有信心、有能力、有办法捍卫国家主权和领土完整，决不容忍、决不姑息、决不坐视任何分裂祖国的图谋得逞。
Settlement of the Taiwan issue and realization of the complete reunification of China embodies the fundamental interests of the Chinese nation. The Chinese government upholds the basic principle of "peaceful reunification, and one country, two systems" for settling the Taiwan issue, carrying forward the eight propositions on the development of relations between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits and the promotion of the peaceful reunification of China. The Chinese government has consistently adhered to the one-China principle and will never give in or compromise on the fundamental issues concerning state sovereignty and territorial integrity. The change of the Taiwan regional leaders can not change the fact that Taiwan is a part of Chinese territory. Settlement of the Taiwan issue is entirely an internal affair of China. The Chinese government firmly opposes any country selling arms to Taiwan, or entering into military alliances in any form with Taiwan, as well as outside interference in any way. The Chinese government will do its utmost to achieve peaceful reunification, and advocates settling differences through dialogues and negotiations on the basis of the one-China principle. However, if a grave turn of events occurs leading to the separation of Taiwan from China in any name, or if Taiwan is invaded and occupied by foreign countries, or if the Taiwan authorities refuse, sine die, the peaceful settlement of cross-Straits reunification through negotiations, then the Chinese government will have no choice but to adopt all drastic measures possible, including the use of force, to safeguard China's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and achieve the great cause of reunification. The "Taiwan independence" means provoking war again, and fomenting splits means relinquishing peace across the Straits. The Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA) unswervingly takes the will of the state as its supreme will and the national interests as its supreme interests. It has the absolute determination, confidence, ability and means to safeguard state sovereignty and territorial integrity, and will never tolerate, condone or remain indifferent to the realization of any scheme to divide the motherland.
国防建设
National Defense Construction
武装力量体制
Structure and Organization of the Armed Forces
中华人民共和国的武装力量由中国人民解放军现役部队和预备役部队、中国人民武装警察部队、民兵组成。中华人民共和国中央军事委员会领导并统一指挥全国武装力量。中华人民共和国设有国防部，隶属于国务院，是国务院领导和管理国防建设事业的部门。
The armed forces of the PRC are composed of the PLA, both the active and reserve components, the Chinese People's Armed Police Force and the militia. The CMC of the PRC directs and assumes unified command of the nation's armed forces. The Ministry of National Defense under the State Council directs and administers national defense work.
中国人民解放军现役部队是国家的常备军，主要担负防卫作战任务，必要时可以依照法律规定协助维护社会秩序。它的组织体制，按基本组织结构分为总部体制、军兵种体制、军区体制。
The active components of the PLA are the country's standing army, which mainly undertake the task of defensive military operations, and help to maintain social order, if necessary, in accordance with the law. Its basic organizational structures can be categorized into the general headquarters/ departments, the services and arms and the military area commands.
总部体制。中国人民解放军的总部体制，由中央军事委员会领导下的总参谋部、总政治部、总后勤部、总装备部构成。中央军事委员会通过四总部对各军区、各军兵种实施领导指挥。国防部的具体工作由四总部分别办理。总参谋部是全国武装力量军事工作的领导机关，负责组织领导全国武装力量的军事建设和组织指挥全国武装力量的军事行动，设有作战、情报、训练、军务、动员等业务部门。总政治部是全军政治工作的领导机关，负责管理全军党的工作，组织进行政治工作，设有组织、干部、宣传、保卫等部门。总后勤部负责组织领导全军的后勤建设和后勤保障工作，设有财务、军需、卫生、军事交通运输、物资油料、基建营房、审计等部门。总装备部负责组织领导全军的武器装备建设工作，设有综合计划、军兵种装备、陆军装备科研订购、通用装备保障、电子信息基础、装备技术合作等部门。
　- The general headquarters/departments. The PLA's general headquarters/departments system is composed of the General Staff Headquarters, the General Political Department, the General Logistics Department and the General Armaments Department, which are placed under the leadership of the CMC. The CMC, through these four general headquarters/departments, directs and commands all the military area commands and the services and arms. The routine work of the Ministry of National Defense is handled, respectively, by these four general headquarters/departments. The General Staff Headquarters is the leading organ of all military work of the nation's armed forces. It organizes and leads the military construction of the nation's armed forces, and organizes and commands their military operations. Under it there are departments in charge of operations, intelligence, training, adjutant and force structure, mobilization, etc. The General Political Department is the leading organ of all political work of the nation's armed forces. It administers the armed forces' Party work, and organizes their political work. Under it there are departments in charge of Party affairs, personnel, publicity, security, etc. The General Logistics Department organizes and directs the armed forces' logistics construction and logistical support. Under it there are departments in charge of financial affairs, quartermaster, health administration, military transportation, materials and POLs, capital construction and barracks, auditing, etc. The General Armaments Department organizes and directs the weaponry and equipment construction work of the armed forces. Under it there are departments in charge of planning; armaments for Navy, military aviation and strategic equipment; Army equipment research, development and procurement; general equipment support; electronics and information infrastructure, equipment and technology cooperation, etc.
军兵种体制。中国人民解放军由陆军、海军、空军三个军种和第二炮兵一个独立兵种组成。陆军由步兵、炮兵、装甲兵、工程兵、通信兵、防化兵、陆军航空兵等兵种和专业部队组成。海军由水面舰艇部队、潜艇部队、航空兵、岸防兵、陆战队等兵种和专业部队组成。空军由航空兵、地空导弹与高射炮兵、雷达兵、空降兵等兵种和专业部队组成。第二炮兵由战略导弹部队、常规导弹部队以及专业部队组成。
　- The services and arms. The PLA is composed of three services - the Army, Navy and Air Force - and an independent arm, the Second Artillery Force. The Army has such arms as the infantry, artillery, armor, engineering, communications, anti- chemical warfare and Army aviation, as well as other specialized units. The Navy has such arms as the surface, submarine, naval aviation, coastal defense and marine corps, as well as other specialized units. The Air Force has such arms as the aviation, surface-to-air missile and antiaircraft artillery, radar, and airborne, as well as other specialized units. The Second Artillery Force is composed of the strategic missile, conventional missile, and other specialized units.
军区体制。中国人民解放军的军区(战区)是根据国家的行政区划、地理位置和战略战役方向、作战任务等设置的军事组织，下辖若干陆军集团军、各兵种部队、后勤保障部队和省军区(卫戍区、警备区)。其主要职能是组织协调本区内陆军、海军、空军部队的联合作战行动和演习；直接领导所属陆军部队的组织建设、军事训练、行政管理、政治工作、后勤和装备保障等；领导本区的民兵、兵役、动员、人民防空和战场建设等工作。中国人民解放军现设有沈阳、北京、兰州、济南、南京、广州、成都7个军区。
- The military area commands. The military area commands (theaters of war) of the PLA are military organi- zations set up according to the state's administrative divisions, geographical locations, strategic and operational orientations, and operational tasks. Under each military area command are a number of Army combined corps, units of various arms, logistical support units, and provincial or garrison commands. Their major functions include organizing and coordinating the joint operations and exercises of the ground, naval and air forces in each military area; exercising direct leadership over Party affairs, military training, administration, political work, logistical and armaments support of the Army units under its jurisdiction; and directing the militia, military service, mobilization, civil air defense and battlefield construction work in the military area. At present, the PLA has seven military area commands, namely, Shenyang, Beijing, Lanzhou, Jinan, Nanjing, Guangzhou and Chengdu.
中国人民解放军设有军事科学院、国防大学、国防科学技术大学。军事科学院是全军最高军事科学研究机关，是全军军事科学研究的中心。国防大学和国防科学技术大学是中央军事委员会直属院校。国防大学主要负责培训高级指挥人员、高级参谋人员和高级理论研究人员。国防科学技术大学主要负责培养高级科学和工程技术人才与专业指挥人才。
The PLA has the Academy of Military Science (AMS), the National Defense University (NDU), and the National University of Defense Technology (NUDT). The AMS is the PLA's highest-level research institute and center of military science. The NDU and the NUDT are the two institutions of higher learning directly under the CMC. The former is mainly responsible for the education and training of senior commanding and staff officers and researchers, while the latter is mainly responsible for the education and training of senior scientists and engineers, and specialized commanding officers.
中国人民解放军预备役部队是以预备役人员为基础、现役人员为骨干，按规定的体制编制组成的部队。预备役部队列入中国人民解放军序列，平时按照规定进行训练，必要时可以依照法律规定协助维护社会秩序，战时根据国家发布的动员令转为现役部队。
The PLA's reserve force is a force with its preset organizational structure, with the reserve personnel as the base and active personnel as the backbone. The reserve force, which is incorporated into the PLA's order of battle, receives military training in peacetime according to relevant regulations, and helps to maintain social order, if necessary, in accordance with the law. In wartime, it may be called into active service in pursuance of a state mobilization order.
中国人民武装警察部队是担负国家赋予的安全保卫任务的部队，受国务院、中央军事委员会双重领导，由内卫、黄金、森林、水电、交通等部队组成。
The Chinese People's Armed Police Force undertakes the task of maintenance of security entrusted by the state. It is under the dual leadership of the State Council and the CMC, and consists of internal security forces, and gold mine, forest, water and power, and transportation security forces.
民兵是国家武装力量的组成部分。民兵在军事机关的指挥下，担负战备勤务、防卫作战任务，协助维护社会秩序。总参谋部主管全国的民兵工作，各军区负责本区域的民兵工作，省军区是本地区的民兵领导指挥机关。
The militia is a component of the state's armed forces. The militiamen and women, under the command of military organs, perform combat readiness support and defensive operations, and help to maintain social order. The General Staff Headquarters is in charge of nationwide militia work. Each military area command is responsible for the militia work under its jurisdiction. Each provincial command exercises leadership and command over the militia in its region.
国防动员与国防教育
Mobilization and Education
全国人民代表大会常务委员会决定全国总动员或者局部动员，国务院和中央军事委员会共同领导动员准备和动员实施工作。1994年11月，国家国防动员委员会成立。该委员会是在国务院、中央军事委员会领导下，主管全国国防动员工作的议事协调机构。其主要任务是：贯彻积极防御军事战略方针，组织实施国家国防动员工作；协调国防动员工作中经济与军事、军队与政府、人力与物力之间的关系，以增强国防实力，提高平战转换能力。
The Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPC) decides on general or partial mobilization, and the State Council and the CMC jointly direct mobilization preparation and implementation. In November 1994, the State Commission for National Defense Mobilization was established. The Commission is a consultant and coordinating body in charge of nationwide defense mobilization under the leadership of the State Council and the CMC. Its major tasks are to carry out the military strategy of active defense, organize and implement the state's defense mobilization, and coordinate the relations between economic and military affairs, the armed forces and the government, and manpower and materials support in defense mobilization, so as to enhance national defense strength and the ability to shift from a peacetime to a wartime footing.
国家在和平时期进行动员准备，将人民武装、国民经济、人民防空、国防交通等方面的动员准备纳入国家总体发展规划和计划。人民武装动员是国家将武装力量由平时体制转为战时体制的措施和活动。国民经济动员是国家将经济部门及其相应的机构有组织、有计划地从平时体制转入战时体制的措施和活动。人民防空动员的主要任务是组织建设和管理人防工程、指挥、通信警报、疏散地域，组织开展重要经济目标防护、人民防空宣传教育、经费和资产管理工作。《中华人民共和国防空法》于1997年1月1日施行。国防交通动员的主要任务是，平时从组织、物质、技术等方面进行交通、通信保障准备，战时组织实施交通、通信保障。
In peacetime the state conducts mobilization preparation and integrates mobilization of the armed forces, the national economy, civil air defense, national defense transportation and other fields into the state's overall development plan and program. Mobilization of the armed forces entails the measures and actions taken by the state to turn the armed forces from a peacetime to a wartime footing. Mobilization of the national economy entails the measures and actions taken by the state, in a well-organized and planned way, to shift the economic sectors and related institutions from a peacetime to a wartime footing. The major tasks of civil air defense mobilization include the directing, building and management of civil air defense projects; command, communications and warning systems, and evacuation areas; the protection of key economic targets; the conduct of civil air defense publicity and education; and the management of civil air defense funds and assets. The Air Defense Law of the PRC went into force on January 1, 1997. Defense transportation mobilization provides organizational, material and technological support to transportation and communications and construction during peacetime, and organizes and implements transportation and communications support during wartime.
一切国家机关和武装力量、各政党和各社会团体、各企业事业单位和公民，在和平时期必须依照法律规定完成动员准备工作；在国家发布动员令后，必须完成规定的动员任务。目前，中国正按照平战结合、军民结合、寓兵于民的方针，进一步完善国防动员体制，增强动员潜力，提高动员能力，推动国防动员建设不断向现代化方向发展。
All the state organs and armed forces, all political parties and mass organizations, and all enterprises, institutions and citizens, must fulfill the mobilization obligations during peacetime according to regulations stipulated by laws, and fulfill the prescribed mobilization tasks after the state has proclaimed a mobilization order. At present, in line with the principle of combining a peacetime with a wartime footing and the military with the civilian sectors, and having reserve soldiers among the people, China continues to perfect its defense mobilization system, strengthen its mobilization potential and capacity, and promote the modernization of defense mobilization work.
中国的国防教育实行经常教育与集中教育、普及教育与重点教育、理论教育与行为教育相结合的原则，对全体公民进行国防理论、国防精神、国防知识和技能等方面的教育，使公民增强国防观念，掌握国防知识，发扬爱国主义精神，自觉履行国防义务。
China's defense education is guided by the principle which combines regular education with intensive education, universal education with advanced education, and textbook education with conduct education. Education in defense theories, spirit, and knowledge and skills is provided for all citizens. This aims to improve the citizens' understanding and knowledge of national defense, to develop their spirit of patriotism and to help them perform defense duties conscientiously.
根据《中华人民共和国国防法》，国家机关和武装力量、各政党和各社会团体、各企业事业单位组织本地区、本部门、本单位开展国防教育。国家和社会利用各种宣传媒体和手段，开展多种形式的国防教育宣传活动；军队开放各类军事博物馆、军史陈列馆、英雄部队荣誉室和英模人物纪念馆，作为地方爱国主义和国防教育的基地；学校在军事机关的协助下，按照不同级别和类别设置适当的国防教育课程，或者在有关课程中增加国防教育的内容。国家将国防教育纳入全民教育轨道，逐步使国防教育社会化、多样化、经常化、制度化。
According to the National Defense Law of the PRC, all state organs and armed forces, all political parties and mass organizations, and all enterprises and institutions are responsible for organizing and carrying out defense education in their respective regions, departments or units. The state and society at large launch defense education and publicity activities in various forms using mass media and other means. The armed forces make use of their military museums, military history exhibitions, halls of fame and memorial halls of heroes as bases for patriotism and defense education among the people. Schools and colleges, with the assistance of military organs, offer appropriate defense courses according to their levels and types, or add defense education to related courses. The state has made national defense education part of the education of the whole people, gradually bringing it into a socialized, diversified, regularized and institutionalized pattern.
　    国防费
　Defense Expenditure
中国政府对国防费始终坚持严格控制、严格管理、严格监督的原则，建立了完善的管理体制和法规制度。国防费预算、决算由全国人民代表大会审查批准。国家和军队的审计机关，对国防费总预算和分项、分部门预算及预算的执行实施全过程审计监督。
The Chinese government has consistently stuck to the principle of strict control, management and supervision of defense spending. It has established a complete administrative and regulatory system. China's defense budget and final accounts are examined and approved by the NPC. The state and armed forces' auditing organs exercise auditing and supervision of the total defense budget, itemized budgets and the budgets for various departments, as well as the entire process of execution of these budgets.
中国国防费包括：人员生活费、活动维持费、装备费。人员生活费主要用于军官、文职干部、士兵和职工的工资、伙食、服装等；活动维持费主要用于部队训练、工程设施建设及维护和日常消耗性支出；装备费主要用于武器装备的科研、试验、采购、维修、运输和储存等。中国国防费的保障范围，既包括现役部队，又包括民兵、预备役部队，并负担了部分退役军官供养和军人子女教育等方面的社会性支出。
China's defense expenditure falls into the following categories: personnel expenses, costs for maintenance of activities, and costs for equipment. Personnel expenses mainly cover the pay, food and clothing of officers, non-ranking cadres, enlisted men and civilian employees. Costs for maintenance of activities mainly cover training, construction and maintenance of facilities and running expenses. Costs for equipment mainly cover research, experimentation, procurement, maintenance, transportation and storage. China's defense expenditure covers not only the active forces, but also the militia and reserve forces. Support for some retired officers, the education of the children of military personnel, and other social spendings are also provided by the defense expenditure.
1998年、1999年和2000年，中国年度国防费分别为934.7亿元、1076.7亿元和1212.9亿元人民币(见图表1〔略〕)。年度国防费的增加，主要是用于军队停止经商活动后，保障各项事业正常运转增加的维持费用；退役军官的安置和供养增加的支出；在社会经济发展和城乡居民人均收入提高的情况下，保证军队人员的生活水平能够同步提高，调整军队人员的工资、津贴标准增加的支出；负担驻澳门部队开支增加的支出。
China's annual defense expenditures in 1998 and 1999 were RMB 93.47 billion yuan and 107.67 billion yuan, respectively, and that for 2000 is RMB 121.29 billion yuan (see table 1). The annual increase in defense expenses went or will go for the most part to cover the increased spending for carrying out their routine duties and operations after the armed forces have ceased commercial activities; increased spending for the placement of retired officers and their pensions; increased spending for pay and subsidy raises for military personnel to keep their living standards in step with the nation's social and economic development and with the increase of the per capita incomes of urban and rural residents; and increased spending for maintaining a garrison in Macao.

国防科技工业
Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense
中国发展国防科技工业的根本目的，是满足国防的基本需要，保障军事装备的生产和供应，提高国防现代化水平。
China's fundamental aim in developing science, technology and industry for national defense is to satisfy the basic demands of national defense, guarantee the production and supply of military equipment, and raise the level of national defense modernization.
新中国成立以来，中国依靠独立自主、自力更生，用较少的投入和较短的时间，建成了一个比较完整的国防科技工业体系，基本满足了人民解放军从单一陆军向陆军、海军、空军、第二炮兵诸军兵种合成军队发展的需要。在尖端技术方面，原子弹、导弹和人造地球卫星的研制成功，使中国成为世界上少数几个独立掌握核武器及空间技术的国家。在常规武器装备方面，中国已经实现了由仿制到自行研制的根本转变，有力地提高了军队武器装备现代化水平。
Since the establishment of the PRC in 1949, the country, with a relatively small input and within a relatively short period of time, has built a comparatively complete defense science, technology and industry system independently through self-reliance, basically meeting the requirements for transforming the PLA from a simple ground force into an integrated armed service comprising the Army, Navy, Air Force and Second Artillery Force. In the field of sophisticated technology, the successful development of atomic bombs, missiles and man-made satellites has made China one of the few countries in the world with its own nuclear weapons and space technology. In the field of conventional equipment, China has made a fundamental shift from copying to independent production, giving a powerful boost to the modernization of the PLA's weaponry.
为适应社会主义市场经济发展需要，建立精干高效的国防科技工业新体系，中国对国防科技工业体制进行了重大改革。1998年3月，新的国防科学技术工业委员会成立。国防科工委作为国务院主管国防科技工业的部门，对国防科技工业实施政策、法规、规划、标准、监督等方面的行业管理。1999年7月，核、航天、航空、船舶、兵器工业总公司等五个军工总公司改组为中国核工业集团、中国核工业建设集团、中国航天科技集团、中国航天机电集团、中国航空工业第一集团、中国航空工业第二集团、中国船舶工业集团、中国船舶重工集团、中国兵器工业集团和中国兵器装备集团等十大集团公司。通过改革，中国国防科技工业引入市场竞争机制，逐步优化结构和改善布局，精干军工队伍，增强平战转化能力，努力建立开放式的新军工体系。
To meet the demands of the development of the socialist market economy, and set up a new defense science, technology and industry system with top-notch efficiency, China has carried out foundamental structural reforms. In March 1998, a new Commission of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense was set up, to act as the leading department of the State Council in this regard, responsible for carrying out disciplinary management like policies, laws and regulations, plans, standards, and supervision in defense science, technology and industry. In July 1999, the corporations of five military industries, involved in nuclear, astronautics, aeronautics, shipbuilding and weapons sectors respectively, were reorganized into ten corporations, namely China National Nuclear Corporation, China Nuclear Engineering and Construction Corporation, China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation, China Aerospace Machinery and Electronics Corporation, China Aviation Industry Corporation I, China Aviation Industry Corporation II, China State Shipbuilding Corporation, China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation, China North Industries Group Corporation and China South Industries Group Corporation. Through this reform, the market competition mechanism has been introduced into China's national defense science, technology and industry, the structure and layout of which have been gradually improved. In addition, the contingents of military industry have been streamlined, the capability of shifting from a peacetime to a wartime footing has been enhanced and strenuous efforts have been made to establish a new military industry system of an open type.
中国国防科技工业坚持科教兴业，充分利用国家科技力量发展军工科研生产，加强与世界各国国防科技工业的合作与交流，促进高新技术武器装备研制，加速科研成果转化步伐，努力为军队提供性能先进、质量可靠、配套完善的武器装备。同时，中国国防科技工业大力推进和平利用军工技术，充分发挥军工行业的优势，优先发展民用核电、航天、航空和船舶等产业，实现军民相互促进的良性循环。目前，国防科技工业已成为国民经济建设的重要力量。
In developing its defense science, technology and industry, China adheres to the principle of reliance on science and education, makes full use of the country's scientific and technological capacity to develop military research and production, strengthens cooperation and exchanges in this field with other countries worldwide, promotes development of new and high technology weapons and equipment, accelerates the pace of application of scientific research findings, and strives to supply arms of high performance, reliable quality and complete sets. Meanwhile, China's defense science, technology and industry, by strongly promoting the peaceful use of military industry technology and bringing the advantages of military industry into full play, gives priority to the development of civilian-use nuclear energy, aerospace, aviation, and shipbuilding industries, and thereby forms a benign circle of mutual military-civilian progress. Now, China's defense science, technology and industry has become an important force in the country's national economic development.
边防建设
Frontier Defense
中国有2.2万多公里陆地边界和1.8万多公里大陆海岸线，与周边20多个国家接壤或隔海相望。中国政府奉行睦邻友好政策，严格按照与相邻国家签订的条约、协定和联合国海洋法公约，对陆地边界和拥有的海域实施防卫、管辖，维护国家领土主权和海洋权益，保卫边防、海防安全。中国主张通过谈判解决悬而未决的边界和海域划界问题，重视在边境地区建立互信机制，反对使用武力或采取激化事态的行动。中国已与大部分周边国家解决或基本解决了历史遗留的边界问题。六十年代，中国与朝鲜、蒙古、阿富汗、巴基斯坦、尼泊尔、缅甸谈判解决了边界问题；九十年代，又先后与老挝、俄罗斯、哈萨克斯坦、吉尔吉斯斯坦、塔吉克斯坦、越南等六国签订了新的边界条约或协定，重新划定或基本划定了边界。中国与老挝、俄罗斯重新勘定了边界，中哈勘界野外作业已经完成，中吉勘界已经启动，中越勘界即将展开。中国与朝鲜、蒙古、俄罗斯、缅甸、越南、老挝等国家分别签订了边境管理制度、建立相互信任措施、预防危险军事活动、开展边防合作等一系列条约、协定和协议，在双边或多边的法律框架内共同维护边界秩序，保持了边境地区的和平与稳定。中国大力发展与周边国家的各种合作关系，全国沿边、沿海地区目前有对外开放口岸200余个。
　China's land borders total more than 22,000 km in length; its mainland coastline stretches for some 18,000 km; and it neighbors more than 20 countries, either contiguous or separated by stretches of sea. The Chinese government pursues a policy of good neighborliness and friendship. It defends and administers its land borders and territorial seas, safeguards the country's territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests, and secures both its land and sea borders, strictly in accordance with treaties and agreements it has signed with its neighboring countries, and the United Nations maritime conventions. China advocates settling pending and unresolved border and maritime demarcation issues through negotiations, attaches importance to the setting up of a mutual confidence-building mechanism in border regions, and opposes the use of force or provocative acts. China has solved or basically solved boundary issues left over by history with most of its adjacent countries. In the 1960s, China and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), Mongolia, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Nepal and Myanmar settled their border issues through negotiations. In the 1990s, China signed new border treaties or agreements with Laos, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Vietnam, re-demarcating or basically demarcating the respective boundaries. The borders between China and Laos and Russia were re-surveyed; the field survey of the border between China and Kazakhstan has been completed; the survey of the border between China and Kyrgyzstan has started, and the survey of the border between China and Viet Nam is about to commence. China has signed treaties, agreements and understandings respectively with the DPRK, Mongolia, Russia, Myanmar, Viet Nam and Laos on border control measures, setting up confidence-building measures, preventing dangerous military activities and promoting border cooperation, jointly maintaining frontier order within a bilateral or multilateral legal framework and preserving peace and stability on the borders. In the course of its vigorous development of various kinds of cooperative relations with its neighboring countries, China has opened more than 200 ports along its land and sea frontiers.
中国实行以军队为主，军地分工负责，军民联防的边海防管理体制。国务院、中央军事委员会统一领导全国的边海防工作。中国政府十分重视边防法制建设，制定了一系列边防法律法规，有关省、自治区、直辖市也制定了相应的地方性法规。国家有关部门对出入境检查、口岸管理等工作颁布了专项的规章。边防管理职能部门积极开展对广大边民的国界意识、边防观念、边防政策和法规的宣传教育，大力开展反走私、缉毒等专项斗争，依法打击各种跨国、跨境犯罪行为。  
China exercises a joint military-civilian land and sea border management system, headed by the military and with a sharing of responsibilities between the military and the local authorities. The State Council and the CMC exercise unified leadership over land and sea border defense. The Chinese government places the utmost importance on the formulation of laws concerning frontier defense. It has enacted a series of laws and regulations, and corresponding local laws and regulations have been put in place by concerned provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the Central Government. The concerned departments of the state have promulgated special regulations with regard to exit and entry control and the management of land and sea ports. Border control departments conduct publicity and education activities aimed at enlightening the people of the frontier areas as to the nature of the boundaries, the concept of frontier defense, and border policies and laws. They also wage special battles to crack down on smuggling and narcotics, and hit hard at transnational, trans-border criminal activities in accordance with the law.
驻军澳门
The Macao Garrison
继1997年中国政府对香港恢复行使主权后，1999年12月20日中国政府又对澳门恢复行使主权。中国人民解放军驻澳门部队进驻澳门履行防务，是中国政府对澳门恢复行使主权的重要标志，是维护国家主权和安全，保持澳门长治久安的重要保证。
Following the Chinese government's resumption of sovereignty over Hong Kong in 1997, on December 20, 1999, it resumed sovereignty over Macao, an important symbol of which is the stationing of a PLA garrison in Macao to fulfill defense duties. It is also an important guarantee for safeguarding national sovereignty and security, as well as the long-term peace and stability of Macao.
中国人民解放军驻澳门部队进驻澳门，严格遵循了法律规定。1993年3月，第八届全国人民代表大会第一次会议通过的《中华人民共和国澳门特别行政区基本法》明确规定，中央人民政府负责管理澳门特别行政区的防务。1999年6月，第九届全国人民代表大会常务委员会第十次会议审议通过了《中华人民共和国澳门特别行政区驻军法》，并自1999年12月20日正式施行。澳门驻军法规定，澳门驻军不干预澳门特别行政区的地方事务，当澳门特别行政区政府在必要时向中央人民政府请求澳门驻军协助维护社会治安和救助灾害时，澳门驻军将遵照中央军事委员会的命令予以必要的帮助；澳门驻军的任务是，担负防卫勤务，管理军事设施，办理有关涉外军事事宜，确保澳门的安全稳定；澳门驻军的费用由中央人民政府负担；澳门驻军实行人员轮换制度。澳门驻军法还对驻军人员的义务与纪律以及司法管辖等问题作了规定。
The stationing of the PLA garrison in Macao was carried out strictly in accordance with the provisions of the law. The Basic Law of the Macao Special Administrative Region (MSAR) of the PRC, passed by the First Session of the Eighth NPC in March 1993, clearly states that the Central People's Government of China is responsible for the defense of the MSAR. In June 1999, the Tenth Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Ninth NPC deliberated and passed the Garrison Law of the MSAR of the PRC, which officially went into effect on December 20, 1999. The provisions of the Garrison Law state that the Macao Garrison will not interfere in the local affairs of the MSAR, but if the government of the MSAR, in a time of need, requests the Central People's Government for the assistance of the Macao Garrison in the maintenance of social order or in case of disaster, the Garrison is obligated to render the necessary assistance in compliance with the instructions of the CMC. The Garrison's tasks are to fulfill defense duties, manage military installations, handle matters concerning foreign military affairs, and ensure Macao's security and stability. The expenses of the Macao Garrison are undertaken by the Central People's Government. The Macao Garrison practices a personnel rotation system. The Garrison Law also contains regulations governing the obligations and discipline of the members of the Garrison, as well as judicial jurisdiction.
中国人民解放军驻澳门部队，隶属于中央军事委员会领导，主要由陆军部队组成，在机关编有少量的海、空军人员。驻澳门部队履行防务职责，必须遵守全国性的法律和澳门特别行政区的法律，执行中国人民解放军的条令条例和规章制度。驻澳门部队进驻澳门后，坚持依法驻军、依法治军、依法行事，严格管理，刻苦训练，严明纪律，全面加强部队正规化建设。按照澳门驻军法规定，驻澳门部队与特区政府建立了正常的工作联系，还适时开辟接触澳门社会的渠道，增加了澳门市民对驻澳门部队的了解和信任。
The PLA Macao Garrison, subordinate to the leadership of the CMC, is mainly composed of ground forces, with some naval and air force personnel on its staff. In carrying out its defense duties, the Macao Garrison must observe the national laws as well as those of the MSAR, and uphold the rules and regulations of the PLA. Following its stationing in Macao, the Macao Garrison has strictly adhered to the law in the aspects of its garrisoning, administration, conduct and management, undertaken arduous training, observed strict discipline, and strengthened in an all-round way the building of the force along the line of regularization. By adhering to the regulations of the Garrison Law, the Garrison has set up normal working relations with the government of the Special Region and has timely established channels for contacts with Macao society, thereby promoting the Macao people's understanding of and trust in the Garrison.
中国人民解放军驻澳门部队将始终贯彻“一国两制”的方针，有效履行防务职责，完成驻军法赋予的各项任务，为国家安全和澳门稳定与发展作出贡献。
The PLA Macao Garrison will persevere in the guideline of "one country, two systems," fulfill its defense responsibilities efficiently and perform every item of its duties under the Garrison Law, so as to contribute to the country's security and Macao's stability and development.
军队建设
     Armed Forces Building

军事法制建设
Military Legal System
《中华人民共和国国防法》规定，中华人民共和国的武装力量必须遵守宪法和法律。中国军队适应国家法制建设发展的需要，贯彻依法治军方针，加强军事法制建设，逐步把国防和军队建设事业纳入法制轨道。
It is stipulated in the National Defense Law of the PRC that the armed forces of the PRC shall abide by the Constitution and laws. To meet the requirements of the development of the country's legal system building, China's armed forces have implemented the guideline of governing the armed forces according to law, strengthened military legal system building and gradually brought the building of national defense and armed forces onto the track of the legal system.
1998年以来，中国的军事立法速度明显加快。全国人民代表大会常务委员会制定了《中华人民共和国澳门特别行政区驻军法》，为驻澳门部队依法驻军、依法履行防务职责提供了法律依据。《中华人民共和国兵役法》的修订，进一步完善了中国的兵役制度。国务院、中央军事委员会修订了《中国人民解放军现役士兵服役条例》，中央军事委员会还制定了《中国人民解放军院校教育条例》、《中国人民解放军边防执勤条令》等40多件军事法规，为加强国防和军队建设，推进军队的各项改革，维护广大官兵的合法权益，提供了充分的法律保障。各总部、各军兵种、各军区制定了300多件军事规章，推进了依法治军的进程。
China's military legislation has significantly accelerated since 1998. The NPC Standing Committee has enacted the Law of the PRC on Garrisoning the Macao Special Administrative Region, providing legal basis for the Macao Garrison to station its troops and perform its defense duties according to law. The revision of the Law of the PRC on Military Service System has further improved China's military service system. The State Council and the CMC have revised the Regulations on the Service of the PLA Soldiers on Active Service, and the CMC has stipulated more than 40 items of military regulations such as the Regulations of the PLA on Institutional Education and the Regulations of the PLA on Border Defense Duties, providing full legal guarantee for the strengthening of the building of national defense and armed forces, the promotion of various military reforms and the protection of the legitimate rights and interests of the officers and soldiers. The PLA general headquarters/ departments, the services and arms and the military area commands have formulated over 300 items of military rules, further advancing the course of governing the armed forces according to law.
根据国家有关法律，中国军队已经形成了由军事法院、军事检察院和保卫部门构成的军事司法体制，对军队内部的刑事案件分别依法行使审判权、检察权和侦查权。军事法院是国家设在军队中的专门人民法院，由中国人民解放军、军区级单位、军级单位的三级军事法院组成，依法独立行使审判权，审判程序与普通人民法院相同。上一级军事法院为下一级军事法院的上诉法院。军事法院受理军队内部的刑事案件；经最高人民法院授权，可以受理其他案件。军事检察院是国家设在军队中的专门人民检察院，同军事法院一样也由三个级别组成，依法独立行使检察权。上级军事检察院领导下级军事检察院的检察工作。军事检察院依照刑事诉讼法的规定，负责对保卫部门侦查的刑事案件进行审查，决定是否批捕、起诉或者不起诉；对利用职权犯罪的刑事案件直接受理和侦查，并决定是否逮捕、起诉或者不起诉；对保卫部门、军事法院的侦查和审判活动是否合法实行监督。中国人民解放军军事法院院长和军事检察院检察长由全国人民代表大会常务委员会任免。中国军队在团以上单位政治机关设保卫部门，依照刑事诉讼法的规定对发生在军队内部的刑事案件进行侦查。根据1997年修订的《中华人民共和国刑法》和中国加入的日内瓦四公约及其1977年两个附加议定书，中国军事司法机关对军人在战时虐待俘虏以及残害、掠夺无辜居民等违反国际人道主义法的行为予以刑事处罚。
Based on the relevant laws of the state, China's armed forces have formed a military judicial system which is composed of the military courts, military procuratorates and internal security organs, respectively exercising the trial, procuratorial and investigating powers in accordance with the law with regard to criminal cases within the armed forces. The military courts are special people's courts set up by the state in the armed forces and consist of three levels: the PLA, the military area command and the corps. The military courts independently exercise trial power in accordance with the law. The trial procedures are the same as those for ordinary people's courts. A military court at the next higher level is the court of appeal for that at the next lower level. The military courts accept criminal cases within the armed forces and may accept other cases with authorization from the Supreme People's Court. The military procuratorates are special people's procuratorates set up by the state in the armed forces and consist of three levels, which are the same as those for the military courts. They independently exercise procuratorial power in accordance with the law. A military procuratorate at a higher level directs the procuratorial work of that at a lower level. The military procuratorates, in accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Procedures Law, assume the responsibility of examining criminal cases investigated by the internal security organs and deciding whether to approve an arrest or to initiate a prosecution; directly accepting and investigating criminal cases involving crimes committed by taking office advantage and deciding whether to make an arrest or to initiate a prosecution; exercising supervision over the legality of the investigatory and judicial activities of the internal security organs and the military courts. The president of the PLA Military Court and the procurator-general of the PLA Military Procuratorate are appointed or removed by the NPC Standing Committee. The internal security organs, set up in the political organs of the PLA units at or above the regiment level, carry out investigation of criminal cases within the armed forces in accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Procedures Law. China's military judicial organs shall render criminal punishment, in accordance with the Criminal Law of the PRC revised in 1997 and the four Geneva conventions and the two 1977 additional protocols to which China has all acceded, on military servicemen for their acts in violation of international humanitarian law such as maltreating prisoners of war, injuring, killing or plundering innocent residents in times of war.
中国军队的律师及其法律服务工作按照国家律师制度管理，军队律师必须通过国家统一组织的考试，取得国家律师资格。全军在集团军、师、旅三级部队编制军队律师，现有法律顾问处272个、专职和兼职律师1688人。军队律师担任军队首长和机关的法律顾问，为其决策提供法律服务；接受刑事诉讼被告人的委托担任辩护人；接受军队单位和军人的委托担任代理人。
The military lawyers in the armed forces and their legal services are administered in line with the national lawyers system. Military lawyers must obtain state-set qualifications after passing uniform national examinations. The armed forces are manned with military lawyers at three levels: The corps, the division and the brigade. At present, there are 272 military legal advisory sections with 1,688 full-time or part-time lawyers. Military lawyers serve as legal advisors to the commanding officers and organs in their decision-making, act as defender when accepting authorization by criminal defendants or act as agent when accepting authorization by military units or servicemen.
军事法制已经成为中国军队教育训练的内容和军队院校教育的课程。根据国家的统一部署，从1986年到2000年，中国军队进行了三次五年普法教育活动。军队各级各类院校都开设法律课程，对学员和军官进行国家法律、军事法规和法律常识以及国际人道主义法等内容的教育。
Military legal knowledge has been incorporated into the military education and training of the PLA units and the curriculum of military academies and schools. In accordance with the unified national plan, China's armed forces have launched three five-year campaigns from 1986 to 2000 to popularize legal knowledge. Law courses are taught to cadets and officers in various military academies and schools, covering national laws, military regulations and rules, fundamental legal knowledge and international humanitarian law.
裁减军队员额
Downsizing and Restructuring
1997年9月，中国宣布在此后三年内再裁减军队员额50万。至1999年底，裁减员额的任务已圆满完成，体制编制的调整改革也已基本结束。
In September 1997, China announced an additional reduction of 500,000 military personnel over the next three years. By the end of 1999, this reduction had been achieved, and the adjustment and reform of the structure and organization of the armed forces had been basically completed.
压缩规模，完成裁减军队员额任务。通过压缩陆军部队规模、调整海空军部队编组、撤销部分装备老旧的部队，改革后勤保障、装备管理体制和院校、训练机构体制编制，撤并军以上机关内设机构等，裁减编制员额50万。其中，陆军精简18.6%，海军精简11.4%，空军精简12.6%，第二炮兵精简2.9%。目前，全军编制人数保持在250万以内。
Reducing military personnel by compressing the scale of the armed forces. The PLA was reduced to less than 2.5 million by downsizing the Army, restructuring the naval and air units, deactivating some units with outdated equipment, restructuring logistical support and equipment management systems, military academies and schools and training establishments, and dismantling and merging internal organs of the units at and above the corps level to cut a total of 500,000 persons. Of the all the services, the Army was cut by 18.6 percent; the Navy, 11.4 percent; the Air Force, 12.6 percent; and the Artillery Force, 2.9 percent.
精简机构，精干军以上领导机关。军以上机关通过调整职能、撤并部门，减少了内设机构和人员。总部和军区、军兵种机关撤并了部分业务部门，业务部门下属的局(处)和编制员额均减少了20%左右。调整后，全军军以上机关共减少1500余个机关部门，军队领导指挥体制进一步趋向精干、灵敏、高效。军队从事经营性生产的290余个生产管理机构和地区性企业管理机构全部撤销或移交地方。
Making the leading organs at and above the corps level leaner by streamlining the organizational structure. By undergoing readjustment of functions, cutting and merging departments, internal bodies and personnel are reduced. By dismantling and merging subdivisions in the PLA general headquarters/departments, military area commands and services and arms, both the subordinate sections of the specialized organs, and personnel were reduced by about 20%. Following this, the total number of organs at and above the corps level was reduced by over 1,500, making the command structure leaner, more agile and efficient. Over 290 business management bodies engaged in commercial activities were either completely dismantled or handed over to local governments.
调整编组，优化部队编成结构。陆军野战部队撤销部分集团军军部和师、团，部队编成结构得到进一步优化。海军、空军和第二炮兵的部队，通过淘汰落后装备、调整编组，撤并了一些建制单位。调整后，陆军野战部队在加强合成和小型化、轻型化、多样化方面取得进展；军兵种技术含量较高部队的比例有所提高，结构进一步趋于合理。
Optimizing the PLA's structure through readjustment. The Army field troops deactivated some corps headquarters and a number of divisions and regiments, thus further improving the organizational structure. The Navy, Air Force and Second Artillery Force dismantled or merged some of their organic units through elimination of outdated equipment and restructuring. After readjustment, the Army field troops have become more integrated, smaller, lighter and more versatile. The services and arms featuring higher technology make up a higher percentage of the armed forces. Their structure is further optimized.
改革体制，进一步理顺关系。成立总装备部，调整武器装备管理体制，实现了全军主要武器装备的集中统管，加强了武器装备建设的统一领导和全系统、全寿命管理。调整后勤保障体制，建立了以军区为基础，区域保障与建制保障相结合、统供保障与专供保障相结合的联勤保障体制，使后勤保障向三军一体、集约化保障方向迈出了一大步。改革院校、训练机构体制编制，减少院校数量，扩大单所院校办学规模，提高军官培训层次和调学比例。军队院校开始走上规模化办校、现代化教学、正规化管理、社会化保障的新路子。
Straightening out relations within the PLA through structural reform. The General Armament Department has been set up to readjust the weaponry and equipment administration system. Centralized management for the major items of weaponry has been achieved. The weaponry and equipment construction has been placed under unified leadership and the across-the-board and life-cycle management strengthened. The logistical support system has been readjusted. A joint logistical support system based on military area commands, which combines area support with organic support and general supply with specialized supply, has been established. These have greatly enhanced the all-service integrated and intensive support capability. The reform of educational and training institutions has resulted in the reduction of military academies and schools, expansion in the scope of individual institutions, upgrading in officer training and greater percentages of officers selected for training. The military academies and schools are moving in the new direction of enlarged scale, modernized instruction, standardized management and socialized logistical support.
思想政治建设
Ideological and Political Work
中国军队始终把思想政治建设摆在各项建设的首位。在新的历史条件下，军队思想政治建设的使命是：为打赢未来高技术战争提供强大的精神动力，为保持人民军队的性质、本色和作风提供可靠的政治保证。
The Chinese armed forces have all along given priority to ideological and political work. In the new historical conditions, the tasks in this regard are: To provide powerful spiritual motivation to win in future high-tech wars, and to provide a reliable political guarantee for preserving the nature of the people's army, its distinctive character and style of work.
中国军队思想政治建设，着眼于全面提高官兵素质，坚持提高政治素质与培养综合素质相统一，学习先进思想与掌握文化知识相统一，教育引导与实践锻炼相统一，严格纪律约束与提高自控能力相统一，努力培养造就具有良好的思想政治素质、军事专业素质、科学文化素质、身体心理素质的全面发展的新一代官兵。为夺取未来战争的胜利，中国军队坚持发挥思想政治工作的强大威力，坚持用正确的思想理论教育官兵，坚持用高尚的革命精神激励官兵，坚持用良好的政治环境熏陶官兵，坚持用严格的组织纪律约束官兵，不断增强官兵的思想觉悟、勇敢精神、顽强作风、铁的纪律，增强官兵的现代意识、科技意识、创新意识，全面提高军队战斗力。
The ideological and political work in the Chinese armed forces aims at raising the overall quality of the officers and men and producing a new generation of officers and men, who are strong ideologically and politically, competent militarily, knowledgeable in science and culture, and fit physically and mentally. To achieve this, the improvement of political quality must be integrated with the improvement of overall quality; the study of advanced ideology with the grasp of general knowledge; the educational guidance with practice; and the strict discipline with greater self-control. To win future wars, the Chinese armed forces resolutely give play to their power in ideological and political work, educate officers and men with correct ideological theory, encourage them with a lofty revolutionary spirit, nurture them in a good political environment, and discipline them strictly with rules and regulations. The Chinese armed forces constantly strive to increase the ideological consciousness, dauntless spirit, sturdy style of work and iron discipline of their officers and men, and to increase their awareness of modernization, science and technology and creativity, and raise the all-round fighting capability of the armed forces.
中国军队坚持中国共产党的绝对领导，坚持全心全意为人民服务的宗旨，坚持国家和人民的利益高于一切，大力发扬爱国主义和革命英雄主义；培养官兵坚定的革命理想信念和自觉的牺牲奉献精神，使官兵树立正确的世界观、人生观、价值观；教育官兵拥护和支持改革，正确对待改革中的利益关系调整，坚持勤俭建军，永葆军队艰苦奋斗的政治本色。
The Chinese armed forces adhere to the absolute leadership of the Communist Party of China and persist in making it their aim to serve the people heart and soul, placing the interests of the state and people above everything else and carrying forward the patriotism and revolutionary heroism of the rank and file. They cultivate in their officers and men a firm faith in revolutionary ideals and a spirit of sacrifice and dedication, foster in them a correct outlook on the world, life and values, educate them to support the reform, to have a correct regard for the interests adjustment arising in the reform, to persist in building the armed forces through diligence and thrift, and to always maintain the armed forces' true political qualities of arduous struggle.
军事训练
Military Training
中国军队坚持把军事训练摆在战略地位，从实战需要出发，从难、从严训练部队。经过数十年的发展建设和不断改革，中国军队在继承优良传统的基础上，形成了具有自身特色的、比较完善的部队训练和院校教育体系。
The PLA has always attached strategic importance to military training. Proceeding from the needs of real fighting, the PLA conducts arduous and strict training of its troops. Through decades of development and continuous reforms and carrying forward its good traditions, a unique and relatively complete system of troop training and institutional education has taken shape.
九十年代后期，中国军队为适应世界军事领域的深刻变革，以打赢高技术条件下局部战争为目标，积极开展科技练兵，大力加强军事训练改革。在发展创新军事理论方面，深入研究高技术局部战争的新情况、新特点，加强军事训练学科建设，不断完善作战训练理论特别是联合作战训练理论，修订并颁布了新一代《战役纲要》、《战斗条令》。在改革训练内容方面，突出新知识、新技能、新装备、新战法的学习和训练，加大训练难度和强度，形成了新的训练内容体系。在改进训练方法和手段方面，积极推进基地化、模拟化、网络化训练，建成了适应不同作战训练要求的合同战术训练基地体系，基本完成了战役、战术模型与武器系统模拟器的联接和各军兵种、各专业模型的互联，推广了分布交互式作战指挥模拟系统、新型装备操作训练模拟器材和计算机辅助训练系统，形成了覆盖全军各大单位和院校的军事训练信息网络。在完善训练管理机制方面，严格执行《中国人民解放军军事训练条例》等训练法规，实施正规化训练，并适应国家、军队改革调整出现的新形势，加强和改进了训练的组织领导与管理。近年来，周密组织实施了兰州、济南、南京、广州等战区诸军兵种联合军事演习，全面提高了官兵综合素质和高技术条件下部队的整体作战能力。
In the late 1990s, the PLA, in order to adapt to profound changes in the world's military affairs and win high-tech local wars, actively engaged in military training featuring new technology, and energetically carried out military training reforms. In the development and innovation of military theories, new conditions and characteristics of high-tech local wars have been studied in depth. New disciplines in military training have been set up. Operational training theories, especially for combined operations, have been continuously improved. Newly-revised doctrines for operations and battles have been promulgated to adapt to the new situation. In updating training programs, emphasis has been laid on the learning of and training in new knowledge, skills, equipment and warfare. A new training program system has taken shape, with the focus on enhancing the level of difficulty and intensity of training. In improving training methods and means, the practice of base training, and simulated and network training have been actively promoted. A combined tactical training base system suitable for various combat training requirements has been established, and the linking of campaign and tactical models with weapon system simulators as well as a network linking models of services and arms and specialized models have been basically completed. In addition, a distributive interactive operational command and control simulation system, new equipment operation training simulators and a computer- aided training system have been widely applied. A military training information network covering all the major units and academies and schools of the PLA has been set up. To improve the training management mechanism, efforts have been made to strictly carry out the PLA's Military Training Regulations and other training statutes, conduct regularized training, and enhance the organization, leadership and administration of military training consonant with the new situation arising from the state and armed forces' reform. In recent years, joint and combined arms exercises have been meticulously organized in the Lanzhou, Jinan, Nanjing and Guangzhou military area commands, greatly raising the comprehensive quality of officers and men and the overall fighting capability of the troops under high-tech conditions.
中国军队院校坚持把培养高素质的新型军事人才作为根本目标，着眼二十一世纪国防和军队现代化建设的需要，建立具有中国特色的军队院校教育体制。1999年军队院校进行体制编制调整改革，撤销、合并、改建了部分院校，将原来培养指挥军官和技术军官的两大类院校，调整为培养生长军官和在职军官的两大类院校，并新组建了国防科学技术、信息工程、理工、海军工程和空军工程5所综合大学。在军官培训体制方面，逐步实行军队自己培养和依托国民教育培养并举，逐年扩大研究生教育规模，并力争到2010年使生长军官基本接受高等教育。在军官组训方式方面，部分生长军官先在综合院校完成本科学历教育和军事基础训练，再根据即将担任的职务在专业院校完成专业训练；将技术性较强的指挥专业与相应技术专业融合成新专业，对部分军官实行指挥与技术合训；对中级指挥军官实行军政合训，指挥员与参谋人员同校培训，医务和机关政治军官全军统一归口培训。通过调整改革，军队院校的总数减少了约三分之一，院校体制趋向规模化和综合化，军事人才培训层次、质量和效益得到明显提高。
　With the basic objective of training new high-quality military personnel, and bearing in mind the needs of defense and armed forces modernization in the 21st century, the PLA has set up an institutional education system with Chinese characteristics. In the structural reform in 1999, the PLA's system of academies and schools underwent a structural reform, canceling, merging and reconstructing some institutions. As a result, the original two categories of institutions for training commanding and technical officers have been replaced by two categories of institutions for training officer candidates and in-service officers. Five universities have been established - the universities of national defense science and technology, information engineering, science and engineering, naval engineering, and air force engineering. Officer training has shifted to a two-track system - this is to gradually realize the targets of the military providing such training while being supported by national education. The training of its postgraduates is increasing on a yearly basis. The PLA is making an effort to have all officer candidates receive higher education by 2010. Some officer candidates, who have received regular (four-year) college education and basic military training at comprehensive educational institutions, will then receive professional training at specialized institutions in accordance with their future posts. New specialties have been brought into being by integrating highly technical command specialties with relevant specialties, and some officers will receive integrated command and technical training. Middle-level commanding officers will receive integrated military and political training. Commanding and staff officers will receive training in the same institutions, and medical and political officers throughout the PLA will receive unified training. Through readjustment and reform, the total number of military academies and schools has been reduced by about one-third, their structure has become more comprehensive and their scale has been expanded, and the training level, quality and benefits have been markedly improved.
后勤建设
Logistics
中国军队把后勤建设作为全面提高战斗力、适应现代战争要求的重要组成部分。坚持在平战结合、军民结合，统筹兼顾、突出重点，科学管理、勤俭节约的原则下，努力为军队建设、作战和其他活动提供后勤保障。
The PLA regards logistical construction as an important part of the effort toward comprehensively enhancing combat effectiveness and meeting the needs of modern warfare. On the principle of combining a peacetime with a wartime footing, combining the army with the people, overall planning, emphasis on key points, scientific management, and diligence and thrift, it strives to provide adequate logistical support for army building, operations and other activities.
新中国成立以来，中国军队的后勤工作不断发展，已经由单一的陆军后勤发展为诸军兵种合成的军队后勤，由简陋落后的后勤装备发展为拥有现代技术和部分高技术支撑的多样化的后勤装备，由保障一般条件下的军事行动发展为保障现代技术特别是高技术条件下的军事行动。
Since the founding of New China, the logistical work of the Chinese armed forces has been making progress constantly. Logistics for the Army alone has evolved into combined logistics for all the services and arms. Simple and backward logistical equipment has evolved into diversified equipment backed by modern technology and some high technology. Logistical support capability for military operations in ordinary conditions has evolved into that under modern, especially high-tech, conditions.
进入九十年代，中国军队后勤着眼高技术条件下局部战争后勤保障需要，加强后勤战备工作。加快应急机动作战部队后勤建设，组建后勤应急机动保障力量，提高后勤应急和综合保障能力。加大战场建设的投入，合理调整战备物资储备规模、布局和结构。坚持科技兴后勤，不断提高后勤保障手段的现代化水平，研制并为部队装备了一批野战、机动、高效的后勤补给、生活保障、医疗救护、快速抢修装备，海上补给、空中加油和第二炮兵机动保障等技术性强的专用后勤装备也有了长足发展。从2000年1月起，中国军队开始实行以军区为基础，区域保障与建制保障相结合、统供保障与专供保障相结合的联勤保障体制，通用物资供应和通用勤务保障由军区统一组织，专用物资供应和专用勤务保障由军兵种按建制系统组织实施。
In the 1990s, the logistical work of the Chinese armed forces focused on meeting the needs of providing logistical support during local wars in high-tech conditions and strengthening the logistical operational readiness. Logistical work supporting emergency mobile forces has been quickened. Logistical support forces for emergency mobile operations has been organized. And the logistical support capabilities for crisis response have been enhanced. Investment in war preparation projects has been increased. The scope, distribution and structure of war material reserves have been properly adjusted. And by reliance on science and technology, logistical support has been invigorated, so as to continuously raise the level of the modernization in logistical support. Marked progress has been made in the research and development of highly technical and specialized logistical equipment to provide the armed forces with flexible and effective field facilities for logistical supply, sustainment support, medical aid and emergency repair, surface replenishment, air refueling and maneuverability support for the Second Artillery Force. In January 2000, the Chinese armed forces started to practice the joint logistics system, which is based on military area commands by the combination of regional support with organic system support and the combination of general supply support with special supply support. Unified general-purpose material supply and service support are provided by military area commands, and special material supply and service support are provided by the services and arms through their organic channels.
为适应社会主义市场经济的发展和军队质量建设的需要，中国军队对后勤工作进行了一系列改革。从1998年12月起，军队和武警部队不再从事经商活动，军队所办的6000多个企业，大部分自行撤销，其余移交地方。1998年7月，根据《中华人民共和国国防法》关于国家实行军人保险制度的要求，国务院和中央军事委员会共同颁布了《军人保险制度实施方案》，逐步建立起具有中国特色的军人保险制度，并于1998年、1999年分别启动了军人伤亡保险和军人退役医疗保险制度。近年来，中国军队不断探索并努力实现社会化保障，借助社会力量，利用市场资源，精干担负军事保障职能的机构，提高国防费使用效益。从2000年1月起，在军级以上机关和驻大中城市的军队院校、医院等单位，逐步推行饮食保障、营房保障和商业服务社会化。
To keep pace with the development of the socialist market economy and meet the needs of the armed forces' quality construction, the Chinese armed forces have carried out a series of reforms in logistical work. In December 1998, the PLA and the Armed Police Force ceased to engage in commercial activities. Most of the more than 6,000 enterprises run by the military were closed down, or handed over to local authorities. In July 1998, in conformity with the requirements of the military insurance system stipulated in the National Defense Law of the PRC, the State Council and the CMC jointly promulgated the Program for the Implementation of the Military Insurance System. A military insurance system with Chinese characteristics is gradually taking shape. In addition, the soldiers' casualty insurance system and the demobilized soldiers' medical insurance system were implemented in 1998 and 1999, respectively. In recent years, the Chinese armed forces have endeavored, through continuous explorations, to realize a socialized service system by contracting out certain logistical support items, utilizing market resources and streamlining military support establishments, so as to raise the cost- effectiveness of defense expenditure. From January 2000, mess management, barracks maintenance and post exchange service will be gradually contracted out in organizations at or above the corps level and military academies and hospitals in large- and medium-sized cities.
武器装备建设
Weaponry and Equipment
中国军队始终把武器装备建设放在突出地位，努力实现武器装备的现代化，提高军队防卫作战能力。
Consistently placing weaponry construction in a prominent position, the Chinese armed forces strive to modernize military equipment and enhance their operational capability for self- defense.
新中国成立以来，中国坚持以自力更生为主、积极借鉴国外先进军事技术的方针，武器装备现代化建设取得了巨大成就，为建设现代化的军队，为保卫国家的主权与安全，提供了有力保障。陆军及通用武器装备基本实现制式化、系列化，提高了火力压制、地面突击、战场机动、战场情报侦察、作战指挥和防护能力，满足了多兵种联合作战的要求。海军在导弹化、立体化、信息化建设方面取得了很大进步，已具备了近海防御作战能力。空军具备了相当水平的全天候、全天时、全空域作战能力，一批高技术武器装备正在陆续装备部队。第二炮兵已拥有近程、中程、远程和洲际导弹武器系统，并具备快速反应和机动作战能力。
Since 1949 China has adhered to the principle of focusing on self-reliance while actively drawing on advanced foreign military technology. It has made great achievements in modernizing its weaponry, providing a powerful support for building a modernized army and safeguarding state sovereignty and security. The basic realization of standardization and serialization of the Army and general-purpose armaments has enhanced the capabilities of fire repression, ground assault, battlefield maneuverability, battlefield intelligence and reconnaissance, operational command and protection, and has thus met the demand for combined operations. The Navy has made great progress in enhancing missile availability, three- dimensional operation capability and information capability, and it thus has acquired the capability of offshore defensive operations. The Air Force has acquired an all-weather, all-aerospace and round- the-clock operational capability of a rather high level, and is being equipped with certain high-tech weaponry. The Second Artillery Force has been equipped with short-range, medium-range and long-range and intercontinental missile systems, and has the capability of rapid reaction and mobile operations.
中国军队为适应社会主义市场经济发展和政府机构改革要求，从1998年起，逐步建立了新的武器装备管理体系。中国军队坚持科技强军战略，依靠科技创新加快新型武器装备研制步伐，推动武器装备发展；重视发挥市场机制的作用，鼓励适度竞争，逐步完善军事装备订货制度，建立健全科研、订购合同制；逐步实行武器装备全系统、全寿命管理，提高高技术武器装备的质量，控制高技术武器装备的全寿命费用，增强武器装备建设的整体效益；进一步加强武器装备管理法规和装备工作制度的建设，使武器装备建设适应新的管理体系，走上协调有序、高效运行的轨道。
To meet the requirements of an evolving socialist market economy and the restructuring of government organs, the PLA has gradually set up a new weaponry management system since 1998. Based on the strategy of invigorating the armed forces by reliance on science and technology, Chinese armed forces are quickening the pace of new weapon R and D and pushing the development of their armaments by means of scientific and technological innovations. They attach importance to giving play to the role of the market mechanism by encouraging appropriate competition. They are gradually improving their equipment ordering system, and building and improving the research and acquisition contracting system. A system featuring across-the- board and life-cycle management will be gradually practiced, which would raise the quality and control the life-cycle cost of high-tech weapons, and increase the overall effectiveness of weaponry construction. In addition, laws and regulations concerning equipment administration, and procedures for equipment work will be improved that fit in with the new management system so that the equipment work will be accomplished in an orderly, coordinated and highly efficient way.
为适应世界军事的发展和现代战争的特点，中国军队武器装备现代化建设将致力于尽快实现军队武器装备由半机械化、机械化向自动化、信息化的转变，使军队掌握尽可能先进的武器装备，确保完成国家赋予军队的神圣使命。
Faced with the world's military developments and the characteristics of modern warfare, the Chinese armed forces will, in the course of modernizing their weaponry, devote themselves to transforming semi-mechanized and mechanized weapon systems to automatized and informationized systems as soon as possible, so that they can possess weapons as advanced as possible and assure the accomplishment of the sacred missions assigned to them by the nation.
参加国家减灾救灾行动
Disaster Relief
中国是世界上自然灾害较多的国家。针对大江大河的水患，部分地区的干旱和风暴潮，铁路、公路沿线的泥石流、滑坡等，中国军队积极参加驻地政府组织的减灾工程建设。近两年来，共参与修建防洪堤2万多公里，水库30多座，防潮坝300多公里，排灌站300余处，其中包括黄河小浪底、长江三峡、淮河流域综合治理、甘肃雨水集流、宁夏防沙治沙等工程，在保障国民经济与社会可持续发展中发挥了积极作用。为了便于参加救灾行动，军队总部机关、军区、省军区、军分区都派出人员参加国家和地方抢险救灾指挥机构的工作，协调军地指挥关系，制定减灾救灾措施，建立灾情通报制度，统筹救灾器材物资，并遵循灵活、快速、高效、无误的原则，实施组织协调工作。各部队都制定有抢险救灾方案，平时进行预演，落实船艇、飞机、车辆等救灾装备和器材，确保一有灾情发生，就能立即出动。近两年来，全军参加抢险救灾100多次，出动官兵50多万人。特别是在1998年长江、嫩江、松花江的抗洪战斗中，全军出动30多万官兵，1.25万台车辆，1170艘舟艇，200多架飞机，抢修加固堤坝1万多公里，堵决口和排除险情1.4万余处，抢救转移遇险群众300多万人，为保护人民生命安全和国家财产作出了突出贡献。在抢险的同时，军队还积极组织救灾赈灾活动，帮助灾区人民恢复生产，重建家园，渡过难关。近两年来，共帮助灾区人民建房4万多间，捐衣被2600余万件，捐赠其他物资价值3000多万元人民币。
China is a country vulnerable to natural disasters. To help cope with floods from big rivers, droughts and storms in some areas, and mud-rock flows and landslides along railways and highways, the PLA takes an active part in disaster alleviation projects organized by the local governments. During the past two years, it has participated in building over 20,000 km flood-prevention dikes, over 30 reservoirs, over 300 km anti-tide dams, and more than 300 irrigation and drainage pumping stations, including such comprehensive projects as the Xiaolangdi on the Yellow River, the Three Gorges on the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River Valley, rainfall flow concentration in Gansu Province, and sand prevention and control in the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region. It has played a positive role in supporting the national economy and sustainable social development. To participate in disaster relief work, the general headquarters/departments, military area commands, provincial military commands and lower-level commands have all assigned personnel to the national and local rescue and relief command organs, to coordinate the command relationship between the military and local governments, formulate rescue and relief measures, establish disaster situation reporting systems, manage relief assets, and implement organization and coordination of disaster relief in a flexible, rapid, efficient and accurate way. The participating units all have their own rescue plans. Routine rescue rehearsals are conducted to keep boats, planes, motor vehicles and other disaster relief assets in readiness for immediate action in case of any disaster. The past two years have witnessed more than 500,000 PLA officers and men participating in more than 100 rescue and relief operations. In particular, in the fight against the floods from the Yangtze, Nenjiang and Songhua rivers in 1998, the PLA contributed more than 300,000 officers and men, as well as 12,500 motor vehicles, 1,170 boats and ships and over 200 planes, repaired or reinforced dikes and dams over 10,000 km long, closed breaches and remove dangers at more than 14,000 places. They also rescued and evacuated more than three million victims, making outstanding contributions to the protection of the people's lives and the state property. The PLA, while engaging in disaster relief, has also taken an active part in post-disaster rehabilitation by raising donations and helping disaster-stricken people to resume production, rebuild homes and overcome difficulties. In the past two years, the armed forces have helped disaster-stricken people to build more than 40,000 houses, and donated over 26 million items of clothing and quilts, and other materials worth more than 30 million RMB yuan.
国际安全合作
     International Security Cooperation
    军事交往
Military Exchanges
中国坚持在和平共处五项原则的基础上，独立自主地处理对外军事关系，开展军事交流与合作。中国军队遵循军事外交为国家总体外交服务，为国防和军队现代化建设服务的宗旨，积极开展灵活、务实的对外交往，为增进和加强同世界各国军队的互信、友谊和合作，为地区和世界的和平、稳定与发展作出了不懈努力。
China handles its military relations independently, and conducts military exchanges and cooperation with other countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. Military diplomacy should serve the state's overall diplomacy and the modernization of national defense and the armed forces. In pursuance of this purpose the PLA has actively engaged in external contacts and exchanges in a flexible and practical manner, and made sustained efforts for enhanced mutual trust, friendship and cooperation with armed forces of other countries, and for regional and world peace, stability and development.
近两年来，中国军队共派出重要团组70多批，访问了60多个国家，接待了来访的外国军队高级代表团160多批。此外，还有150多批中国军队专业团组出访和180多批外军专业团组来访，中外军队进行了友好互利的专业技术交流合作。
Over the past two years, China has sent more than 70 high-level military delegations to over 60 countries, and hosted some 160 high-level foreign military delegations. In addition, the Chinese military has conducted friendly and mutually beneficial exchanges and cooperation with its foreign counterparts in the technical and other specialized fields. In this regard it has dispatched more than 150 technical or other specialized delegations abroad, while over 180 foreign military delegations of the similar nature have visited China.
中国与周边国家的军事关系有了进一步发展。中俄两军的高层交往活跃，双边军事关系发展顺利。中国军队努力促进与东北亚国家军队的关系，对朝鲜半岛乃至东北亚的稳定作出了积极贡献。中国同东南亚、南亚及中亚地区国家的军事交往保持了发展势头。与此同时，中国进一步加强了和西亚、非洲、拉美、大洋洲等地区国家及东欧、独联体国家的军事关系，继续向有关发展中国家提供人员培训、装备器材、后勤物资、医疗卫生等方面的援助，并积极拓展新的交往领域。
China has improved its military relations with its neighbouring countries. With active high-level military contacts, the bilateral military relations between China and Russia have developed smoothly. Chinese armed forces have made great efforts to promote ties with the armed forces of Northeast Asian countries, and made positive contributions to the stability of the Korean Peninsula and Northeast Asia as a whole. China's military contacts with countries in Southeast, South and Central Asia have maintained their momentum. At the same time, China has further strengthened its military relations with countries in West Asia, Africa, Latin America and Oceania, as well as those in Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States. Chinese armed forces have continued to provide assistance to their counterparts in developing countries in personnel training, equipment, logistical materials, and medical care, and will seek to widen the scope of contacts in the future.
1999年5月，针对以美国为首的北约轰炸中国驻南斯拉夫联盟大使馆的严重事件，中国推迟了中美两军高层交往项目。随着近来两国关系的逐步改善，中美两军开始恢复有关正常交往。2000年1月，中美两国国防部进行了副部长级防务磋商。同年7月，美国国防部部长访华。中国始终重视发展同欧洲国家的军事关系，与有关国家开展和保持了军队高层互访和各层次的军事交往。
In May 1999, China postponed its high-level military exchange programs with the United States in response to the serious incident of bombing of the Chinese Embassy in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia by the US-led NATO. Following the gradual improvement of the relations between the two countries, normal military contacts between China and the US have resumed. The defense ministries of the two countries held defense consultations at the vice-ministerial level in January 2000. The US defense secretary visited China in July of the same year. China has always attached importance to the development of military relations with European countries, and has exchanged or maintained high-level visits and conducted military exchanges with them at various levels.
近两年来，中国海军舰艇编队对新西兰、澳大利亚、菲律宾、马来西亚、坦桑尼亚、南非等国进行了友好访问。法国、俄罗斯、澳大利亚、马来西亚、比利时、加拿大、土耳其等国海军军舰也先后访华。此外，中国军队还派出了大量专业技术团组赴有关国家考察、参观、培训、研究，也接待了许多外军同类专业技术团组的来访。这些交往涉及科研、学术、军事教育、军事训练、军队管理、文化体育、医疗卫生等诸多方面。1999年8月，中国军队参加了在克罗地亚举办的第二届世界军人运动会。
The past two years have seen good-will visits by Chinese naval vessels to New Zealand, Australia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Tanzania and South Africa, and visits to China by naval vessels from France, Russia, Australia, Malaysia, Belgium, Canada and Turkey. In addition, China has sent many delegations or groups of military experts to other countries for visits, training, study or research, and hosted many similar foreign delegations or groups. These exchanges of visits have covered many fields, ranging from military education, training and management to scientific research, academic study, culture and sports, and medical care. In August 1999, the PLA participated in the Second World Military Games held in Croatia.
中国军队与外军在教育训练方面的合作有了新的发展。近两年来，先后向俄罗斯、德国、法国、英国、巴基斯坦、孟加拉、泰国、科威特等国派出军事留学人员200余名，同时接收了来自亚、非、拉美和欧洲等地区有关国家的近千名军事留学及各类培训人员。
New progress has been made in cooperation between the PLA and foreign armed forces in military education and training. In the past two years, more than 200 Chinese military personnel have been sent to study in Russia, Germany, France, Britain, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Thailand and Kuwait, while nearly 1,000 military personnel from Africa, Latin America and Europe and other Asian countries have come to study in China.
地区安全合作
Regional Security Cooperation
中国支持在平等参与、协商一致、求同存异、循序渐进的基础上开展多形式、多层次、多渠道的地区安全对话与合作。中国主张，相互尊重而不是恃强凌弱，相互合作而不是彼此对抗，协商一致而不是强加于人，应该成为亚太地区多边安全对话与合作的方向和特征。中国参加了东盟地区论坛(ARF)、亚洲相互协作与建立信任措施会议(CICA)、亚太安全合作理事会(CSCAP)、东北亚合作对话会(NEACD)、中美日三边学术研讨会等多边安全对话合作进程，主张通过这些政府和民间讨论安全问题的重要渠道，增进各国相互了解与信任，促进地区和平与稳定。
China supports regional security dialogue and cooperation at different levels, through various channels, in different forms and in a step-by-step manner pursuant to the principles of participation on an equal footing and reaching consensus through consultation in the spirit of seeking common ground while reserving differences. China maintains that the multilateral security dialogue and cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region should be oriented toward and characterised by mutual respect instead of the strong bullying the weak, cooperation instead of confrontation, and seeking consensus instead of imposing one's will on others. China has participated in the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), Conference on Interaction and Confidence- Building Measures in Asia (CICA), Council on Security Cooperation in the Asia-Pacific Region (CSCAP), Northeast Asia Cooperation Dialogue (NEACD), Academic Symposium of China, the United States and Japan, and other activities for multilateral security dialogue and cooperation. China stands for enhancing mutual understanding and trust between countries and promoting regional peace and stability through these important governmental and non-governmental channels of discussions on security issues.
东盟地区论坛是目前亚太地区唯一的泛地区官方多边安全对话与合作论坛。中国外交部和国防部代表参加了历届东盟地区论坛外长会议与高官会议，以及在东盟地区论坛框架内的建立信任措施、维和、海上搜救、抢险救灾、预防性外交、不扩散、指导原则等各类官方、非官方会议。近两年来，中国在北京先后主办了在东盟地区论坛框架内的热区卫生与热带病防治军事医学研讨会、中国安全政策培训班、第四届国防院校长会议和军转民合作研讨会。
The ARF is the only pan-Asia-Pacific official multilateral security dialogue and cooperation forum at present. Representatives of the Chinese Ministries of Foreign Affairs and National Defense have attended all the ARF foreign ministers and senior officials' meetings. They have also attended official or unofficial meetings on confidence-building measures, peace- keeping, maritime search and rescue, emergency rescue and disaster relief, preventive diplomacy, non-proliferation, and guiding principles within the framework of the ARF. In the past two years, China has hosted, successively in Beijing, the ARF Seminar on Tropical Hygiene and Prevention and Treatment of Tropical Infectious Diseases, the ARF Professional Training Program on China's Security Policy, the 4th ARF Meeting of Heads of Defense Colleges, and the ARF Seminar on Defense Conversion Cooperation.
中国主张东盟地区论坛应继续以建立信任措施为核心，探索新的安全观念和安全方式，支持各方就预防性外交问题进行探讨，并主张应首先就亚太地区预防性外交的概念、定义、原则和范畴进行充分讨论，形成共识。中国积极倡导在东盟地区论坛框架内进行军事医学、军事法学和军转民多边合作，倡议建立东盟地区论坛海洋信息资料中心，鼓励高层军事互访、军舰互访和人员交流，支持抢险救灾合作以及海上航行安全、海洋环保合作等。
China holds that the ARF should continue to focus on confidence-building measures, explore new security concepts and methods, and discuss the question of preventive diplomacy. At the same time, it believes that the parties concerned should have a full discussion first on the concept, definition, principles and scope of preventive diplomacy in the Asia-Pacific region and reach consensus in this regard. China has actively advocated the development of multilateral cooperation in military medicine, military law and the conversion of military technologies and facilities for civilian use within the framework of the ARF. It has proposed to establish an ARF marine information and data center, encouraged exchange of high-level military visits and port calls by naval vessels, as well as exchanges of military personnel, and supported cooperation in emergency rescue and disaster relief, safety in maritime navigation and marine environmental protection.
中国一直积极参与哈萨克斯坦倡导的亚洲相互协作与建立信任措施会议进程，认为会议宗旨与中国的亚洲安全目标基本一致，主张会议在充分考虑亚洲地区特殊性和多样性的基础上稳步发展。
China has been an active participant in the process of the CICA initiated by Kazakhstan, believing the purpose of the CICA as generally consistent with its security goals in Asia. It is of the view that the CICA should develop step by step with full consideration given to the regional peculiarities and diversities in Asia.
中国于1996年正式加入亚太安全合作理事会，并于1997年成立亚太安全合作理事会中国委员会，认真参与理事会的活动。
In 1996, China formally joined the CSCAP, and in 1997 established the CSCAP China Committee. And it has actively participated in the CSCAP activities.
自1993年东北亚合作对话会成立以来，中国参加了历次会议，并于1996年、1999年先后在北京主办了第四次、第九次东北亚合作对话会全体大会，中国还与其他成员一道推动对话会就东北亚国家合作指导原则达成了一致。
Since the establishment of the NEACD in 1993, China has attended all its meetings, and in 1996 and 1999, hosted the fourth and ninth NEACD meetings in Beijing. China has also worked with other member states and succeeded in getting the NEACD to reach agreement on the guiding principles for cooperation between Northeast Asian countries.
中国与俄罗斯、美国、法国、德国、乌克兰、加拿大、澳大利亚、新西兰等国及周边一些国家和地区组织建立了定期或不定期的安全、防务和军控磋商机制。本着维护亚太地区持久和平与稳定的积极意愿，中国国防部和其他有关部门的官员及学者日益广泛和深入地参与关于亚太安全的各类研讨和相关活动，增进了中国与有关国家间的相互了解与信任。
China has established, with Russia, the United States, France, Germany, Ukraine, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and some neighbouring countries and regional organizations, mechanisms for regular or irregular consultations on the issues of security, defense and arms control. Desirous of maintaining lasting peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region, officials and scholars from China's Ministry of National Defense and other departments concerned have involved themselves more extensively and deeply in symposiums and other activities on Asia-Pacific security. This has promoted mutual understanding and trust between China and the countries concerned.
建立信任措施
Confidence-Building Measures
中国政府一贯重视并积极推进与周边国家建立信任措施，积极倡导按照平等对话、不干涉别国内政、不针对第三国、不威胁和损害他国的安全与稳定的原则，通过谈判协商达成各种形式的边境协定、协议，维护各方相互同等安全和地区的和平与稳定。
The Chinese government has always attached importance to confidence-building measures with neighbouring countries and has worked hard for their adoption. It has energetically advocated the conclusion of border treaties or agreements through talks between the parties concerned on an equal footing in accordance with the principles of non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries and refraining from directing at any third party and threatening or harming other countries' security and stability, so as to safeguard equal security for all the parties concerned, and regional peace and stability.
1996年4月，中国、俄罗斯、哈萨克斯坦、吉尔吉斯斯坦、塔吉克斯坦五国元首在中国上海举行首次会晤，签署了《关于在边境地区加强军事领域信任的协定》。1997年4月，五国元首在莫斯科进行了第二次会晤，签署了《关于在边境地区相互裁减军事力量的协定》，规定：各方致力于在相互同等安全原则的基础上把部署在各国边境地区的军事力量裁减到与各国间睦邻友好关系相适应的最低水平；重申互不使用武力或以武力相威胁，不谋求单方面的军事优势；各方部署在边境地区的军事力量不进行威胁另一方及损害边境地区安宁与稳定的任何军事活动；裁减和限制在协定适用地理范围内的军事人员数量和主要种类的武器装备及军事技术装备数量。1998年7月和1999年8月，五国在哈萨克斯坦阿拉木图和吉尔吉斯斯坦比什凯克，分别进行了第三、第四次元首级会晤，并签署了联合声明。2000年7月，五国元首在塔吉克斯坦杜尚别举行第五次会晤，乌兹别克斯坦总统以观察员身份参加会晤，会后签署了《杜尚别声明》。声明指出，五国在维护本地区安全与稳定方面发挥着日益重要和积极的作用，各方将致力于使“上海五国”成为五国在各领域开展多边合作的地区机制。五国决定深化在政治、外交、经贸、军事、军技和其他领域的合作，以巩固地区的安全与稳定，并切实落实五国会晤所签署的关于在军事领域加强信任及在边境地区相互裁减军事力量的协定的所有条款。五国表示，决不允许利用本国领土从事损害五国中任何一国主权、安全及社会秩序的行为，支持彼此为维护五国国家独立、主权、领土完整和社会稳定所作的努力。
In April 1996, the heads of state of China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan met in Shanghai for the first time and signed the Agreement on Confidence-Building in the Military Field Along the Border Areas. In April 1997, the heads of state of the five countries met again in Moscow and signed the Agreement on Mutual Reduction of Military Forces in the Border Areas. The agreement stipulates that each country should reduce its military forces deployed in the border areas to such a minimum level as to be compatible with the good- neighborly relations it enjoys with the other four countries in accordance with the principle of equal security. It reiterates that none of the contracting parties should use or threaten to use force against the others, nor should any of them seek military superiority unilaterally; that the military forces of one party deployed in the border areas shall not engage in any military activity to threaten any other party or prejudice the peace and stability of the border areas; and that the number of military personnel and the quantity of the main categories of weaponry and military technical equipment in the geographical areas as defined in the agreement should be reduced or restricted. In July 1998 and August 1999, respectively, the heads of state of the five countries met for the third and fourth times in Alma-Ata in Kazakhstan and Bishkek in Kyrgyzstan, where they signed joint statements. In July 2000, the heads of state of the five countries met for the fifth time in Dushanbe of Tajikistan. The President of Uzbekistan attended the meeting as an observer. The Dushanbe Statement signed after the meeting points out that the five countries are playing an increasingly important and positive role in safeguarding regional security and stability and are committed to making the "Shanghai Five" a regional mechanism for their multilateral cooperation in all fields. The five countries have decided to deepen cooperation in the political, diplomatic, economic and trade, military, military technology and other fields to consolidate regional security and stability, and to effectively implement all the clauses of the agreements they have signed concerning confidence-building in the military field and the mutual reduction of military forces along the border areas. They have made it clear that they will never allow any country to use their territory to conduct any activities detrimental to the sovereignty, security and public order of any of the five countries, and that they will support each other's efforts in safeguarding their national independence, state sovereignty, territorial integrity and social stability.
2000年3月，五国国防部长在哈萨克斯坦阿斯塔纳进行了首次会晤。会后签署的联合公报重申：在照顾各方及近邻地区利益的条件下，发展五国间军事政治领域的关系，开展平等互信的友好合作；这种合作是开放性的，不针对任何国家或国家集团。五国强调，坚决反对任何国家以保护民族、宗教利益和人权为借口干涉别国内政。各方声明绝不容忍民族分裂主义、宗教极端主义和恐怖主义，坚决反对这些势力在本国领土上从事针对别国的任何活动，并将共同采取有效措施对其进行打击，以维护本地区的和平与稳定。五国同意进一步研究加强军事领域信任措施的可能性，加强边防部门间的合作，联合打击各种跨国犯罪行为；共同举行预防危险军事活动、打击国际恐怖主义分子、抢险救灾等方面的联合演练，交流维和经验和在维和行动中相互协作。
In March 2000, the defense ministers of the five countries met in Astara of Kazakhstan for the first time. The joint communiqué signed after the meeting reiterates the determination of the five countries to develop their military and political relations and conduct friendly cooperation based on equality and mutual trust with due consideration to the interests of all the parties and their neighboring areas. It points out that such cooperation is not exclusive, nor is it directed at any third country or bloc of countries. The five countries stressed their firm opposition to interference in other countries' internal affairs on the excuse of protecting ethnic or religious interests, or human rights. They declared that they would never tolerate national separatism, religious extremism or terrorism, and that they would resolutely oppose any activity by such forces on their respective territory against other countries. They pledged to jointly take effective measures to crack down on such activities so as to safeguard regional peace and stability. The five agreed that they would further study the possibility of strengthening confidence- building measures in the military field, promote cooperation between frontier departments, and jointly combat transnational crimes, stage joint exercises in preventing dangerous military activities, combating international terrorists and carrying out emergency rescue and disaster relief, share peace-keeping experiences and coordinate with each other in their peace- keeping operations.
1995年8月，中国国防部与俄罗斯联邦边防总局签署了《中俄边防合作协议》，规定：双方开展边防合作，致力于把中俄国界建成和平、安宁和友好的边界；交换有助于边防合作的信息；协调有效守卫国界和维持其秩序的措施；预防在国界地区发生意外事件和冲突的情况；采取协调措施制止在国界地区发生违法犯罪活动；协助搜查、扣留和及时移交对方越境者及其交通工具与财物；交流组织和实施守卫国界的经验；在提供和使用守卫国界的技术器材方面相互援助等。
In August 1995, China's Ministry of National Defense and the Frontier Defense General Administration of the Federation of Russia signed the Sino-Russian Agreement on Frontier Defense Cooperation. Under the Agreement, the two sides shall cooperate with each other in frontier defense and make every effort to turn the boundary between China and Russia into one of peace, tranquility and friendship; exchange information in the interest of frontier defense cooperation; coordinate their measures to effectively guard their boundary and maintain order there; prevent accidental incidents or conflicts in the border areas; coordinate with each other in taking measures against illegal activities in the border areas; assist in the search for, detention and timely transfer of people crossing boundaries illegally, together with their transportation means and belongings; ex- change experiences on organizing and implementing the defense of their national boundaries; and help each other with technical equipment for the defense of their national boundaries.
1999年11月，中国国防部与蒙古国边防军管理局签署了《中蒙边防合作协议》，规定：双方开展边防合作，致力于保持中蒙边界的和平与稳定；交换有助于维护边界地区正常秩序的信息和其他有关信息；交流守卫管理边界和维护其正常秩序的措施与经验；预防在边界地区发生意外事件和纠纷；制止通过边界非法偷运武器、贩毒、走私、抢劫、盗窃等违法犯罪活动；加强边界代表机构合作，协商处理边境事件，协助寻找并及时移交对方越境人员及其交通工具、财物和越境牲畜；通报可能给对方造成损失的自然灾害、流行病和疫情，采取措施防止其越界等。
In November 1999, China's Ministry of National Defense and the Frontier Guards Administrative Bureau of Mongolia signed the Sino-Mongolian Agreement on Cooperation in Frontier Defense. The Agreement stipulates that the two sides shall promote cooperation in frontier defense and make efforts to keep peace and stability on the boundary between China and Mongolia; exchange information in the interest of maintaining normal order in the border areas and other related information; discuss measures and share experiences in guarding and managing the border and maintaining normal order there; prevent accidental incidents or disputes in the border areas; crack down on illegal activities across the border, such as smuggling of weapons, trafficking in narcotics and other contrabands, robbery and theft; strengthen cooperation between boundary representative bodies of the two countries in handling border incidents through consultation, and assist each other in the search for and timely transfer of the people crossing boundaries illegally, together with their transportation means, livestock and other belongings; and inform each other of any possible natural disasters or epidemic diseases which may cause losses to the other and measures to be adopted to prevent them from crossing the boundary.
中国政府有关部门和边防部队忠实地履行条约、协议的规定，积极发展与邻国相应部门的交往与合作，通过建立通报协商机制、边防会谈、会晤机制等，及时处理边界事务，共同打击边境地区各种违法犯罪活动。随着多种信任措施的逐渐建立和落实，各种边界纠纷和事件的发生数量明显减少，边界地区的正常秩序得到有效维护和保持，和平友好的边界氛围逐步形成。
The relevant government departments and frontier forces of China have faithfully implemented the stipulations of the treaties and agreements, and actively promoted exchanges and cooperation with their counterparts of neighboring countries. They have dealt with boundary affairs in a timely manner and cracked down on illegal activities in the border areas together with their counterparts through communication and consultation mechanism, and frontier talks and meetings. With the gradual establishment and implementation of confidence-building mea- sures, there has been a visible decrease in the number of boundary disputes and incidents, a normal order in the border areas has been effectively maintained, and a peaceful and friendly atmosphere has gradually prevailed along the boundary.
参与联合国维持和平行动
Participation in UN Peace-Keeping Operations
依照《联合国宪章》的规定，联合国安理会在维护世界和平与安全方面负有首要责任。中国是联合国安理会常任理事国，一贯致力于维护国际和平与安全，重视并支持联合国在《联合国宪章》宗旨和原则指导下，为维护国际和平与安全发挥其应有的作用。
According to the UN Charter, the UN Security Council is conferred primary responsibility for the maintenance of world peace and security. As a permanent member of the UN Security Council, China has been committed to the maintenance of international peace and security. It attaches great importance to the United Nations and supports it in playing its due role in maintaining international peace and security under the guidance of the purposes and principles of the UN Charter.
为使联合国维和行动取得成功并健康发展，联合国维和行动应遵循《联合国宪章》的宗旨和原则，特别是尊重国家主权和不干涉内政的原则；维和行动应事先征得当事国同意、严守中立以及除自卫外不得使用武力；应坚持以斡旋、调解、谈判等和平手段解决争端，不应动辄采取强制行动，不能实行双重标准，不能借联合国之名进行军事干涉；应坚持实事求是，量力而行，不在条件不成熟时实施维和行动，更不应使之成为冲突一方，偏离维和的根本方向。
In order to guarantee their success and sound development, UN peace-keeping operations must strictly adhere to the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, especially the principles of respect for state sovereignty and non-interference in other countries' internal affairs. No UN peace-keeping operations should be launched without the prior consent of the countries concerned. All UN peace-keeping forces should strictly observe neutrality and non-use of force except for self-defense. Peaceful means, rather than coercive measures, should be sought to settle disputes, such as mediation, good offices and negotiation. Double standards and military interference under the name of the UN should be rejected. Any decision on launching UN peace-keeping operations must be based on practicability and capabilities, and no peace-keeping operation should be launched when conditions are not ripe. Peace-keeping forces should not become a party to a conflict, which would be a deviation from the basic purpose of peace-keeping operations.
中国本着上述精神积极参加了联合国维持和平行动方面的活动。至今为止，中国已先后向“联合国停战监督组织”(UNTSO)、“联合国伊拉克—科威特观察团”(UNIKOM)、“联合国柬埔寨临时权力机构”(UNTAC)、“联合国西撒哈拉公民投票特派团”(MINURSO)、“联合国莫桑比克行动”(ONUMOZ)、“联合国利比里亚观察团”(UNOMIL)、“联合国塞拉利昂观察团”(UNOMSIL)和“联合国塞拉利昂特派团”(UNAMSIL)等多项联合国维和行动派出军事观察员、军事联络官和军事顾问共522人次，派出工程兵部队两批800人次。
Adhering to the above principles, China has participated actively in UN peace-keeping activities. So far China has sent 522 military observers, liaison officers or advisers and 800 men in two batches from engineering units to the UN peace-keeping operations, including the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM), United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ), United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL), United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) and United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).
目前，中国仍有38名军事观察员分别在“联合国停战监督组织”、“联合国伊拉克—科威特观察团”、“联合国西撒哈拉公民投票特派团”和“联合国塞拉利昂特派团”4个任务区执行任务。2000年1月，应联合国请求，中国政府向联合国东帝汶过渡行政当局派遣了15名民事警察。这是中国首次派遣民事警察执行联合国维和任务。此外，中国政府仍继续参加联合国维和行动待命安排。
At the moment, 38 Chinese military observers are still serving with UNTSO, UNIKOM, MINURSO and UNAMSIL. In January 2000, at the request of the United Nations, the Chinese government dispatched 15 civilian policemen to the United Nations Transitional Authority in East Timor, the first time for China to send civilian policemen to UN peace-keeping operations. In addition, the Chinese government has continued to take part in the UN's stand-by arrangements.
为支持联合国完成《联合国宪章》赋予的使命，中国共有4人在各项联合国维和行动中牺牲，数十人负伤。
Meanwhile, four Chinese have laid down their lives, and dozens have been wounded in UN peace-keeping operations in order to support the United Nations in fulfilling the mission entrusted to it by the UN Charter.
军控与裁军
　 Arms Control and Disarmament
近年来，国际军控与裁军领域出现了一系列消极事态。冷战结束后一度出现的良好裁军势头受到损害，国际社会防扩散和推动裁军进程的努力受到严重挑战，并将面临新一轮军备竞赛的危险，前景令人担忧。
Recent years have witnessed a series of negative developments in the area of international arms control and disarmament, which have undermined the sound momentum international disarmament efforts had gathered following the end of the Cold War. The international community is confronted with grave challenges in its efforts to stem the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and promote disarmament, and with the emerging danger of a new arms race, which has become a cause for serious concern.
中国政府高度重视军控与裁军问题，致力于推动国际军控与裁军进程的健康发展。中国政府认为，公正、合理的军控与裁军努力，有助于国际形势的缓和，是维护世界和平、增进各国安全的重要途径。与此同时，中国政府坚决反对少数国家以军控与裁军为手段削弱他国，增强自身军事优势，谋求地区和世界霸权。
The Chinese government attaches great importance to the issue of arms control and disarmament, and works hard to promote the sound development of the international disarmament process. It believes that fair and rational arms control and disarmament efforts are conducive to the relaxation of the international situation, thereby constituting a vital means of safeguarding world peace and enhancing international security. At the same time, the Chinese government resolutely opposes the attempts of some countries to use arms control and disarmament as a tool to weaken other countries and reinforce their own military superiority for the purpose of seeking regional or global hegemony.
核武器和导弹防御问题
Nuclear Weapons and Missile Defense
中国一贯主张全面禁止和彻底销毁核武器，并为此作出了不懈的努力。中国自拥有核武器的第一天起就郑重声明，在任何时候、任何情况下，都不首先使用核武器。此后又明确承诺无条件不对无核武器国家和无核武器区使用或威胁使用核武器。2000年5月，中国同其他四个核武器国家共同发表联合声明，宣布所拥有的核武器不瞄准任何国家。
China has consistently advocated the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, and has made unremitting efforts to this end. On the very first day it came into possession of nuclear weapons, China solemnly declared that it would not be the first to use such weapons, no matter what the time or the circumstances. Later, China undertook unconditionally not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones. In May 2000, China, together with four other nuclear-weapon states, issued a joint statement declaring that their nuclear weapons are not targeted at any country.
中国积极支持有关国家在自愿基础上建立无核武器区的努力，并承诺向无核武器国家和无核武器区提供积极和消极安全保证。1999年7月，中国同东盟就《东南亚无核区条约》议定书案文达成一致，并在五个核武器国家中率先承诺签署修改后的议定书。
China vigorously supports the efforts of the countries concerned to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones on a voluntary basis, and has undertaken to provide both positive and negative security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon states and nuclear- weapon-free zones. In July 1999, China reached an agreement with ASEAN on the text of the Protocol to the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty and became the first among the five nuclear-weapon states to commit itself to signing the Protocol once its revised text is open for signature.
《不扩散核武器条约》作为最具普遍性的国际军控条约，为防止核武器扩散、实现核裁军和促进和平利用核能的国际努力奠定了坚实的法律基础。中国支持巩固和加强国际核不扩散体制、忠实履行《不扩散核武器条约》义务的立场不会改变。1998年12月，中国与国际原子能机构签署了旨在加强保障监督体系有效性的附加议定书，承诺向国际原子能机构申报与无核武器国家进行核合作的有关情况。
As the most universal international arms control treaty, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has laid a solid legal foundation for international efforts to stem the proliferation of nuclear weapons, promote nuclear disarmament and enhance the peaceful use of nuclear energy. China supports all efforts to consolidate and strengthen the international mechanism of nuclear non-proliferation, and has faithfully fulfilled its obligations under the NPT. This position of China's will remain unchanged. In December 1998, China signed with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) the Additional Protocol aimed at strengthening the effectiveness of the IAEA safeguard system, undertaking to report to the IAEA China's nuclear cooperation with non-nuclear-weapon states.
《全面禁止核试验条约》是国际核裁军进程中的一个重要里程碑。作为条约的首批签约国，中国正积极参与条约组织筹委会工作，认真落实国内各项履约准备。作为一个核武器国家，中国政府十分清楚自己在条约生效问题上所承担的责任，因此，尽管近两年来出现了印巴核试验和美国参议院拒绝批约等消极事态，中国政府仍致力于尽早批准条约。目前，中国政府已完成了必要的准备工作，并已将条约正式提交全国人民代表大会审议批准。
The CTBT is an important milestone in the process of international nuclear disarmament. As one of the first countries to sign the CTBT, China has been actively participating in the work of the Preparatory Commission of the Treaty Organization, and earnestly carrying out preparatory work for the implementation of the Treaty in China. Being a nuclear-weapon state, China is fully aware of its responsibilities concerning the entry into force of the Treaty. Therefore, the Chinese government is still committed to the early ratification of the Treaty, despite such negative developments in the past two years as the nuclear tests in India and Pakistan and the US Senate's refusal to ratify the CTBT. Now, the Chinese government has already completed the necessary preparations and formally submitted the Treaty to the NPC for review and ratification.
中国对谈判缔结“禁止生产核武器用裂变材料条约”(简称“禁产条约”)历来持积极态度。中国政府认为，条约谈判的进展与国际和平与安全形势有着密切的关系。在美国大力发展并着眼于部署反导武器和外空武器，美俄仍拥有足以毁灭世界多次的庞大核武库的情况下，继续核裁军和防止外空军备竞赛应该是比“禁产条约”谈判更为优先的多边军控议题。因此，日内瓦裁军谈判会议不应只强调“禁产条约”谈判，而忽视防止外空军备竞赛和核裁军问题，应该对三项议题予以同等重视，平衡地开展实质性工作。
China has all along adopted a positive attitude to the negotiation of a convention that prohibits the production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons purposes, known as the FMCT. The Chinese government maintains that progress on the issue of the FMCT negotiations is, and will continue to be, closely related to the global peace and security situation. In view of the fact that the US is accelerating its efforts for the development and possible deployment of a national missile defense system and space weapons, and that the US and Russia still possess nuclear arsenals large enough to destroy the world many times over, it is China's position that continued nuclear disarmament and the prevention of an arms race in outer space are multilateral fora of arms control that should be given more priority than the FMCT negotiations. Therefore, the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva should not emphasize the importance of only the FMCT negotiations to the neglect of the issues of nuclear disarmament and the prevention of an arms race in outer space, and should, at the minimum, give equal attention to all three issues by carrying out its substantive work in a balanced manner.
《限制反弹道导弹条约》(简称《反导条约》)对于维护全球战略平衡与稳定、推动核裁军、促进国际安全具有重要作用。然而，近年来美国不顾《反导条约》的有关规定以及国际社会的反对，加速发展国家导弹防御系统。美国此举将打破全球战略平衡，严重阻碍核裁军进程和国际防扩散努力，威胁世界和平与地区稳定，甚至会引发新一轮的军备竞赛。中国对此表示强烈反对。
The Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems (hereafter referred to as the ABM Treaty) plays a very important role in maintaining the global strategic balance and stability, promoting nuclear disarmament and enhancing international security. However, in recent years the United States has accelerated its development of a national missile defense system in disregard of the relevant provisions of the ABM Treaty and the opposition of the international community. China expresses its strong opposition to such moves on the part of the United States, for they will undermine the global strategic balance, severely hamper the nuclear disarmament process and international non-proliferation efforts, jeopardize global peace and regional stability, and may even touch off a new round of arms race.
第五十四届联合国大会以压倒多数通过了中国、俄罗斯、白俄罗斯共同提出的维护和遵守《反导条约》决议，呼吁条约缔约国不部署旨在保护国家全境的反导系统，支持国际社会作出进一步努力，捍卫条约的不可侵犯性和完整性。决议体现了国际社会反对美国发展和部署反导系统、维护《反导条约》的意志。2000年7月18日，中俄两国元首在北京签署了《关于反导问题的联合声明》，其中强调《反导条约》仍是全球战略稳定与国际安全的基石，是削减和限制进攻性战略武器和防止大规模杀伤性武器扩散的关键性国际协议框架的基础。以某些国家的所谓导弹威胁作为要求修改《反导条约》的借口是根本站不住脚的。修改《反导条约》的文本内容，即是破坏这一条约，必将引发一系列消极后果。主张修改这一条约的国家必将对此承担全部责任。在当前战略形势下，维护《反导条约》的完整性和有效性具有十分重要的现实意义。美国政府应当认真倾听国际社会的呼声，停止发展和部署破坏全球战略稳定的反导系统。
The Resolution on the Preservation of and Compliance with the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, co-sponsored by China, Russia and Belarus, and adopted at the 54th Session of the UN General Assembly with an overwhelming majority, called upon the parties to the ABM Treaty to refrain from the deployment of anti-ballistic missile systems for the defense of their territories. It also expressed support for further efforts by the international community to safeguard the inviolability and integrity of the ABM Treaty. The Resolution is a clear manifestation of the international community's opposition to US efforts to develop and deploy missile defense systems, and of its will to safeguard the ABM Treaty. On July 18, 2000, President Jiang Zemin of the PRC and President Putin of the Russian Federation signed a joint statement on anti-missile defense. In the statement, the Presidents reaffirm that the ABM Treaty remains the cornerstone of global strategic stability and international security, and constitutes the basis for a framework of the key international agreements designed to reduce and limit offensive strategic weapons and to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Emphasizing that it is totally untenable to press for amending the ABM Treaty on the pretext of so-called missile threats from some countries, the Presidents point out that to amend the text of the ABM Treaty is tantamount to an act of undermining the ABM Treaty and will inevitably bring about a series of negative consequences, and that the country which presses for amending this treaty will have to bear the full responsibility for all these consequences. The Presidents also reiterate that under the current strategic situation, it is of great practical significance to preserve the integrity and effectiveness of the ABM Treaty. The United States government should earnestly heed the appeal of the international community and stop the development and deployment of missile defense systems that may undermine global strategic stability.
美国和日本联合研发战区导弹防御系统，并计划在东亚地区部署这种系统，将使美日军事同盟的整体攻防水平提高到前所未有的程度，也远远超出了日本的防卫需要，这将引起地区军备竞赛，不利于亚太地区的安全与稳定。中国对此表示严重关切。
The joint research and development of the theater missile defense (TMD) system by the United States and Japan with a view to deploying it in East Asia will enhance the overall offensive and defensive capability of the US-Japan military alliance to an unprecedented level, which will also far exceed the defensive needs of Japan. This will touch off a regional arms race and jeopardize security and stability in the Asia-Pacific region. China expresses its profound concern over such a development.
中国坚决反对任何国家向台湾提供战区导弹防御系统、部件、技术或援助，坚决反对任何国家以任何形式把台湾纳入其战区导弹防御系统。
China is strongly opposed to the provision of the TMD system, its components and technology, and any such assistance to Taiwan. China is also strongly against any attempt to incorporate Taiwan in any form into the TMD system by any country.

化学武器和生物武器问题
Chemical and Biological Weapons
中国不拥有化学武器，一贯主张全面禁止和彻底销毁化学武器。作为《禁止化学武器公约》的缔约国，中国忠实履行了公约规定的各项义务，按时、完整地递交了初始宣布和年度宣布，接受了公约组织的多次核查，参加了该组织的各次执行理事会会议和缔约国大会。中国还积极支持公约组织的工作，曾数次与该组织合办视察员培训班、研讨会等。1998年6月，中国国家石油和化学工业局又对第三类监控化学品控制清单增加了10种化学品。
China does not possess chemical weapons and has always stood for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of such weapons. As a State Party to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), China has faithfully fulfilled all its obligations under the Convention. It has submitted its initial declaration and annual declarations in time and in their entirety, and accepted several inspections by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). It has also participated in each session of the Executive Council and the Conference of State Parties. China has been active in supporting the work of the OPCW and has co-sponsored, along with the OPCW, a regional seminar on implementation of the Convention, as well as several training courses for inspectors. In June 1998, the State Administration of the Petroleum and Chemical Industry of China added ten chemicals to the third category of the List of Controlled Chemicals.
中国政府认为，公约生效三年以来，执行情况总体是积极的，但也存在着不容忽视的问题：公约普遍性不足，个别缔约国以国内立法的方式对公约变相保留，一些缔约国化学武器销毁工作进展缓慢等。这些问题应尽早得到纠正和解决。
It is the view of the Chinese government that the implementation of the Convention has been, on the whole, satisfactory, since it entered into force three years ago. However, there are problems which should not be ignored: The universality of the Convention leaves a lot to be desired; a certain State Party has made defacto reservations regarding the provisions of the Convention in the form of domestic legislation; and some State Parties have been very slow destroying their chemical weapons stockpiles. These problems should be put right as soon as possible.
中国在历史上曾是化学武器的受害国，领土上至今还遗留着侵华日军遗弃的大量化学武器。这些化学武器严重威胁着当地人民的生命安全，也对当地的生态环境造成了严重破坏。1999年7月，中日两国政府签署了《中华人民共和国政府和日本国政府关于销毁中国境内日本遗弃化学武器的备忘录》。日方在备忘录中明确承认了遗弃化学武器的事实，并承诺认真履行销毁责任和义务。中方希望日方能够切实按照备忘录的有关原则和规定，尽早启动实质性销毁工作。
China has been a victim of chemical warfare. Large quantities of chemical weapons abandoned by the Japanese invaders remain on Chinese soil to this day. These weapons still seriously threaten the lives of the local people and have caused serious damage to the ecological environment. In July 1999, the Chinese and Japanese governments signed the Memorandum on the Destruction of the Chemical Weapons abandoned by Japan in China, in which the Japanese government explicitly admits the fact of the abandoning of chemical weapons, and undertakes to earnestly fulfill the obligation and duty of destroying these weapons. China urges Japan to start the substantive destruction conscientiously and at the earliest date possible, in accordance with the principles and provisions set forth in the Memorandum.
中国不拥有生物武器，历史上曾遭受生物武器的伤害。中国主张全面禁止和彻底销毁生物武器，坚决反对任何国家发展、生产、研制和储存生物武器，也反对任何国家以任何方式扩散此种武器及其技术。作为《禁止生物武器公约》缔约国，中国认真、全面地履行了自己所承担的义务，并逐年向联合国报告与《禁止生物武器公约》有关的建立信任措施方面的资料和情况。
China does not possess biological weapons, and was once a victim of such weapons. China stands for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of biological weapons, and strongly opposes the development, production and stockpiling of biological weapons by any country, as well as the proliferation of such weapons and related technology in any form by any country. As a State Party to the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), China has fully and conscientiously fulfilled its obligations under the Convention and has, on an annual basis, provided the United Nations with information on confidence-building measures in this regard.
中国支持全面加强《禁止生物武器公约》有效性的工作。早在加入公约时，中国就指出了公约缺乏核查机制的不足。中国认为，为了加强公约有效性，应该建立必要的核查机制。但考虑到生物武器和生物技术的复杂性，核查机制的建立必须遵循合理、公正和可行的原则。为了确保缔约国正当的安全和商业利益不受损害，应该制定具体措施防止核查权利的滥用。还应制定具体措施促进缔约国之间为公约不加禁止的目的而进行的生物技术国际合作与交流。这将有助于提高公约及未来议定书的普遍性。
China supports the enhancement of the effectiveness of the BWC in a comprehensive manner. Upon its accession to the BWC, China pointed out the absence of concrete and effective measures for verification. China holds that, in order to strengthen the effectiveness of the BWC, a necessary verification mechanism should be established. In view of the complexity of biological weapons and bio-technology, the verification mechanism to be established must be rational, just and feasible. In order to protect the legitimate security and commercial interests of State Parties, concrete measures aimed at preventing the abuse of verification should be provided for. At the same time, there should be concrete measures to promote international cooperation and exchanges among State Parties in the field of bio-technology for purposes not prohibited by the Convention. These measures will be conducive to enhancing the universality of the Convention and the future Protocol.
防止外空军备竞赛问题
Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space
中国坚决反对外空军备竞赛，主张对外空的探索和利用应完全服务于促进各国的经济、科学和文化的发展，造福全人类。
China is strongly opposed to an arms race in outer space. China maintains that the exploration and utilization of outer space should be for the sole purpose of promoting the economic, scientific and cultural development of all countries, and benefiting all mankind.
防止外空武器化和防止外空军备竞赛的主要目标是禁止在外空试验、部署、使用武器和武器系统及其部件。目前，单方面谋取外空军事和战略优势，乃至控制外空的企图、计划和行动不仅确实存在，并且有新的发展。因此，采取有效措施，制止有关消极事态发展，是当前国际社会面临的现实和紧迫的问题。
Such activities as the testing, deployment or use of weapons, weapon systems or their components should be banned in outer space, in order to prevent the militarization of and an arms race in outer space. At present, there are intentions, plans and actions to pursue unilateral military and strategic superiority in, and control of, outer space. They are not only real but also growing. Therefore, it is realistic and urgent that the international community take effective measures to stop such negative developments.
多年以来，国际社会出于和平利用外空、防止外空军备竞赛的目的，已经缔结了一些规范各国在空间活动的多边或双边国际法律文书。但是，它们没有反映当前最先进的航天技术发展情况，因而都未能起到有效防止外空武器化或防止外空军备竞赛的作用。中国认为，在新的世纪防止外空武器化、防止外空军备竞赛，最为直接、有效的办法是在严格遵守现有适用于外空的双边和多边协定的基础上，谈判缔结新的国际法律文书。
Over a period of years, the international community has, for the purpose of promoting the peaceful uses of outer space and preventing an arms race there, drawn up a series of multilateral or bilateral legal instruments regulating State Parties' space activities. However, these instruments have not reflected the development of the most advanced aerospace technology today, and therefore are unable to effectively prevent the militarization of or an arms race in outer space. China believes that the most direct and effective way to achieve this purpose in the new century is to negotiate and bring into being a new international legal instrument, in addition to continued strict compliance with the existing ones.
第五十四届联合国大会再次以压倒多数通过了防止外空军备竞赛决议。决议强调，谈判缔结一项或多项防止外空军备竞赛的国际协定，仍是裁军谈判会议外空特委会的首要任务。这反映了国际社会对防止外空军备竞赛的普遍愿望和迫切要求。日内瓦裁军谈判会议应在防止外空军备竞赛方面发挥重要作用，应立即重新设立防止外空军备竞赛特委会，谈判缔结一项旨在防止外空武器化和防止外空军备竞赛的新的国际法律文书。
The 54th Session of the UN General Assembly adopted once again the Resolution on the Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space, with an overwhelming majority. The Resolution stresses that the negotiation and conclusion of an international agreement or agreements on the prevention of an arms race in outer space remains the top priority of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Conference on Disarmament on the Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space. This reflects a universal aspiration and an urgent demand of the international community for the prevention of such an arms race. The Conference on Disarmament in Geneva has an important role to play in this respect. It should immediately reestablish the Ad Hoc Committee with a mandate to negotiate a new international legal instrument on the prevention of the militarization of or an arms race in outer space.
杀伤人员地雷问题
Anti-Personnel Landmines
中国政府十分重视杀伤人员地雷误伤平民的问题。自1998年批准《特定常规武器公约》新修订的“地雷议定书”以来，中国政府和军队严格遵守并认真履行议定书的有关规定，并已停止出口不符合议定书规定的杀伤人员地雷。1999年10月，中国向联合国秘书长递交了履行该议定书的国家报告。
The Chinese government has always paid a great deal of attention to the accidental injuries to civilians caused by anti-personnel landmines (APL). Since its ratification of the Amended Protocol to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons in 1998, the Chinese government and its armed forces have strictly complied with and earnestly implemented the provisions of the Protocol, and have stopped exporting APLs that are not in conformity with the standards set out in the Protocol. In October 1999, China submitted its national report on the implementation of the Protocol to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
在限制地雷的同时，中国政府及时清除雷患，在国内和国际扫雷方面作出了积极努力。从1992年初到1999年8月，中国政府先后在中越边境中国一侧进行了两次大规模扫雷行动，共排除各种地雷和爆炸物220多万枚，销毁废弃弹药700余吨，完成扫雷面积300多平方公里，打通边贸通道和口岸290多个，恢复弃耕地、弃荒牧场和山林6万公顷，消除了边境冲突遗留地雷对当地平民的威胁。此外，中国政府还根据议定书有关技术合作与援助的要求，在力所能及的范围内，通过向联合国扫雷自愿信托基金捐款和向雷患严重国家赠送扫雷器材等形式，进行国际扫雷援助。1998年，中国向联合国扫雷自愿信托基金捐款10万美元用于波黑扫雷。1999年10月和2000年5月，中国与联合国合作举办了两期国际扫雷培训班，对来自波黑、柬埔寨、纳米比亚、安哥拉、莫桑比克、埃塞俄比亚、卢旺达7个雷患严重国家的40名学员进行了扫雷技术、实施方法和组织作业程序等内容的培训，收到了良好的效果。
In addition, the Chinese government has made strenuous efforts in mine clearance, both domestically and internationally. From early 1992 to August 1999, the Chinese government launched two large-scale demining operations on Chinese territory along the Sino-Vietnamese border. Over 2.2 million landmines and explosive devices of various kinds were removed, and more than 700 tons of abandoned ammunition and explosive devices were destroyed. An area of over 300 square kilometers was cleared. Some 290 border trade paths and ports of entry and exit were re-opened, and 60,000 hectares of deserted farmland, pastures and forests were restored to their original state. Thus, the threat posed to the local people by the landmines left over from the border conflict has been eliminated. The Chinese government has also, in conformity with the requirements of technological cooperation and assistance as prescribed in the Protocol, provided every possible assistance to mine-affected countries by contributing to the UN Voluntary Trust Fund for Mine Clearance Assistance and donating mine-clearance equipment directly to these countries. In 1998, the Chinese government donated US$ 100,000 to the UN Voluntary Trust Fund for mine clearance operations in Bosnia-Herzegovina. In October 1999 and May 2000, China sponsored two international mine clearance training courses in collaboration with the UN. Forty trainees from seven mine-affected countries (Bosnia- Herzegovina, Cambodia, Namibia, Angola, Mozambique, Ethiopia and Rwanda) attended the courses, the contents of which ranged from mine-clearance techniques to operational methods and organizational procedures, with satisfactory results.
中国政府认为，解决地雷滥伤无辜平民问题，应采取限制地雷和扫雷并举的办法。新修订的“地雷议定书”如能得到广泛的参加和有效的执行，地雷的滥用和控制问题就可以得到圆满解决。就解决人道主义关切而言，当前最为紧迫的任务和最有实效的措施是扫除遍布全球的遗留地雷。
　The Chinese government is of the view that, in addressing the issue of accidental injury to civilians from mines, a two-pronged approach should be adopted, i.e., restrictions on the use of landmines and mine clearance. The Amended Protocol, if universally acceded to and effectively carried out, should be able to satisfactorily resolve the problem of abuse and control of landmines. As far as the humanitarian aspect of the issue is concerned, the most urgent task, and the most effective approach, is to clear the landmines scattered in many parts of the world.
常规武器转让登记和小武器问题
The UN Register of Conventional Arms and the Issue of Small Arms
中国从1992年到1997年参加了联合国常规武器转让登记。然而，自1996年起，个别国家无视联大有关决议的规定，开始在登记册中以所谓“脚注”形式登记其向台湾出售武器的情况。向台湾出售武器显然不是主权国家间的武器转让，而是侵犯中国主权、干涉中国内政的行为。有关国家的上述做法违反了登记册记录主权国家之间合法的武器转让的特性，导致登记册的政治化，严重损害了登记册的完整性和权威性。有鉴于此，中国被迫从1998年起暂停参加登记。中国希望有关方面立即采取切实措施，纠正上述错误做法，恢复和维护登记册的严肃性和完整性。
China participated in the UN Register of Conventional Arms from 1992 to 1997. However, since 1996, a certain country, in disregard of relevant resolutions of the UN General Assembly, began to register its arms sales to Taiwan in the form of a footnote to its national report. It is obvious that the arms sales to Taiwan are not arms transfers between sovereign states. Furthermore, they constitute infringements upon China's sovereignty and interference in China's internal affairs. To place arms sales to Taiwan on the Register is inconsistent with the nature of the Register as a record of legitimate arms transfers between sovereign states. It can only politicize the Register, and as a result, seriously undermine its integrity and authority. This has forced China to suspend its participation in the Register since 1998. It is China's hope that the party concerned can take immediate and feasible measures to rectify its erroneous practice, so that the seriousness and integrity of the Register can be restored and maintained.
中国积极支持国际社会为解决小武器问题所作的努力，赞成采取必要的措施，打击小武器领域非法活动，防止小武器的扩散及过量积累，以减缓有关国家的武装冲突和动荡，遏制恐怖主义和贩毒活动的进一步蔓延。同时，中国政府认为，小武器本身并不是造成有关问题的根源，对于大部分国家来说，小武器仍是其保卫国防和维护社会治安必不可少的手段。解决小武器问题，应切实尊重有关国家的主权，兼顾不同国家和地区的实际情况，不应影响各国合法拥有小武器并进行正常贸易的权利。
China actively supports international efforts to address the issue of small arms. It is in favor of taking necessary measures to combat illicit activities related to small arms, and prevent the proliferation and excessive accumulation of such arms, so as to mitigate the armed conflicts and turbulences in the countries concerned and curb the further spread of terrorism and drug trafficking. Meanwhile, the Chinese government is of the view that small arms by themselves are not the root cause of the problem. For most countries, small arms are still an indispensable means of safeguarding their national defense and social order. In addressing the issue of small arms, the sovereignty of the relevant countries should be fully respected, and the specific conditions of different countries and regions should be taken into consideration. It should also be noted that the right of countries to the legitimate possession of and normal trade in small arms should not be affected.
中国参加了1998年联合国小武器问题政府专家组的工作，支持于2001年召开小武器和轻武器非法贸易各方面问题的国际会议。中国还参加了联合国“打击跨国有组织犯罪公约”特委会关于“打击非法制造和贩运枪支及其零部件和弹药议定书”的谈判工作，与国际社会一道，共同打击非法制造、贩运枪支的有组织跨国犯罪。
China participated in the 1998 UN Group of Governmental Experts on Small Arms. It supports the convening of the International Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Aspects in 2001. China also took part in the negotiation of the Protocol Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition at the UN Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of the Convention Against Transnational Organized Crimes with a view to joining the international efforts to combat transnational organized crimes of illicit manufacture of and trafficking in firearms.
　　　中国在小武器的生产、转让等问题上采取负责任的态度，有严格的法律和行政管理措施。《中华人民共和国枪支管理法》和《中华人民共和国军品出口管理条例》对枪支和弹药的生产、运输、销售、配备以及进出境管理作了详细的规定，并对有关违法行为制定了严厉的处罚措施。
　China takes a responsible attitude toward the manufacture and transfer of small arms, having strict laws and administrative control measures in this regard. The Law of the PRC on the Control of Firearms and The Regulations of the PRC on the Administration of Arms Exports contain detailed stipulations on the manufacture, transportation, sales, equipment and entry and exit of firearms and ammunition, and stipulate stringent penalties for violations. 　　

中国的航天
China's Space Activities
中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China
二○○○年十一月，北京
November 2000, Beijing

目　　录
Contents
前　　言
Foreword
宗旨原则
Aims and Principles
发展现状
 Present Situation　
空间技术
Space Technology
空间应用
Space Applications
空间科学
Space Science
未来发展
 Future Development
发展目标
Development Targets
发展思路
Development Concepts
国际合作
 International Cooperation
指导原则
Guiding Principles
基本政策
Fundamental Policies
主要活动
Important Events
优先领域
Priority Cooperation Areas

前　言
  Foreword
人类的活动范围，经历了从陆地到海洋，从海洋到大气层，从大气层到外层空间的逐步拓展过程。二十世纪五十年代出现的航天技术，开辟了人类探索外层空间活动的新时代。
The scope of mankind's activities has experienced expansion from land to ocean, from ocean to atmosphere, and from atmosphere to outer space. Space technology, which emerged in the 1950s, opened up a new era of man's exploration of outer space.
经过近半个世纪的迅速发展，人类航天活动取得了巨大成就，极大地促进了生产力的发展和社会的进步，产生了重大而深远的影响。航天技术已成为当今世界高技术群中对现代社会最具影响的高技术之一，不断发展和应用航天技术已成为世界各国现代化建设的重要内容。
　Having developed rapidly for about half a century, mankind's space activities have scored remarkable achievements, greatly promoted the development of social productivity and progress, and produced profound and far-reaching effects. Space technology has turned out to be one field of high technology that exerts the most profound influence on modern society. The continuous development and application of space technology has become an important endeavor in the modernization drive of countries all over the world.
中华民族在人类发展史上曾创造过灿烂的古代文明。中国最早发明的古代火箭，便是现代火箭的雏形。1949年中华人民共和国成立后，中国依靠自己的力量，独立自主地开展航天活动，于1970年成功地研制并发射了第一颗人造地球卫星。迄今，中国在航天技术的一些重要领域已跻身世界先进行列，取得了举世瞩目的成就。二十一世纪，中国将从本国国情出发，继续推进航天事业的发展，为和平利用外层空间，为人类的文明和进步作出应有的贡献。
The Chinese nation created a glorious civilization in the early stage of mankind's history. The gunpowder "rocket" invented by ancient Chinese was the embryo of modern space rockets. After the People's Republic of China was founded in 1949, China carried out space activities on its own, and succeeded in developing and launching its first man-made satellite in 1970. China has made eye-catching achievements, and now ranks among the world's most advanced countries in some important fields of space technology. In the 21st century, China will continue to promote the development of its space industry in the light of its national situation, and make due contributions to the peaceful use of outer space, and to the civilization and progress of mankind.
在迈进二十一世纪之际，有必要对中国发展航天事业的宗旨原则、发展现状、未来发展和国际合作等作简要的介绍。
At the turn of the century, it is of significance to give a brief introduction to the aims and principles, present situation, future development and international cooperation concerning China's space activities.
    
宗旨原则
    Aims and Principles
中国政府一直把航天事业作为国家整体发展战略的重要组成部分，坚持为了和平目的探索和利用外层空间，使外层空间造福于全人类。中国作为发展中国家，其根本任务是发展经济，不断推进国家现代化建设事业。航天活动在维护国家利益、实施国家发展战略中的重要地位和作用，决定了中国发展航天事业的宗旨和原则。
The Chinese government has all along regarded the space industry as an integral part of the state's comprehensive development strategy, and upheld that the exploration and utilization of outer space should be for peaceful purposes and benefit the whole of mankind. As a developing country, China's fundamental tasks are developing its economy and continuously pushing forward its modernization drive. The aims and principles of China's space activities are determined by their important status and function in protecting China's national interests and implementing the state's development strategy.
中国航天事业的发展宗旨是：探索外层空间，扩展对宇宙和地球的认识；和平利用外层空间，促进人类文明和社会发展，造福全人类；满足经济建设、国家安全、科技发展和社会进步等方面日益增长的需要，维护国家利益，增强综合国力。
The aims of China's space activities are: to explore outer space, and learn more about the cosmos and the Earth; to utilize outer space for peaceful purposes, promote mankind's civilization and social progress, and benefit the whole of mankind; and to meet the growing demands of economic construction, national security, science and technology development and social progress, protect China's national interests and build up the comprehensive national strength.
中国航天事业的发展原则是：
China carries out its space activities in accordance with the following principles:
坚持长期、稳定、持续的发展方针，使航天事业的发展服从和服务于国家整体发展战略。中国政府高度重视航天事业在实施科教兴国战略和可持续发展战略，以及在经济建设、国家安全、科技发展和社会进步中的重要作用，将航天事业的发展作为国家整体发展战略中的重要组成部分，予以鼓励和支持。
-Adhering to the principle of long-term, stable and sustainable development and making the development of space activities cater to and serve the state's comprehensive development strategy. The Chinese government attaches great importance to the significant role of space activities in implementing the strategy of revitalizing the country by reliance on science and education and that of sustainable development, as well as in economic construction, national security, science and technology development and social progress. The development of space activities is encouraged and supported by the government as an integral part of the state's comprehensive development strategy.
坚持独立自主、自力更生、自主创新，积极推进国际交流与合作。中国立足于依靠自己的力量，进行航天技术攻关，实现技术突破；同时，重视航天领域的国际交流与合作，按照互利互惠的原则，把航天技术自主创新与必要的引进国外先进技术有机地结合起来。
-Upholding the principle of independence, self-reliance and self-renovation and actively promoting international exchanges and cooperation. China shall rely on its own strength to tackle key problems and make breakthroughs in space technology. Meanwhile, due attention shall be given to international cooperation and exchanges in the field of space technology, and self-renovation in space technology shall be combined organically with technology import on the principles of mutual benefit and reciprocity.
根据国情国力，选择有限目标，重点突破。中国发展航天事业以满足国家现代化建设的基本需求为目的，选择对国民经济和社会发展有重大影响的项目，集中力量，重点攻关，在关键领域取得突破。
-Selecting a limited number of targets and making breakthroughs in key areas according to the national situation and strength. China carries out its space activities for the purpose of satisfying the fundamental demands of its modernization drive. A limited number of projects that are of vital significance to the national economy and social development are selected so as to concentrate strength to tackle major difficulties and achieve breakthroughs in key fields.
提高航天活动的社会效益和经济效益，重视技术进步的推动作用。中国谋求更加经济、更加高效的航天发展道路，力求技术先进性和经济合理性相统一。
Enhancing the social and economic returns of space activities and paying attention to the motivation of technological progress. China strives to explore a more economical and efficient development road for its space activities so as to achieve the integration of technological advance and economic rationality.
　　坚持统筹规划、远近结合、天地结合、协调发展。中国政府统筹规划并合理安排空间技术、空间应用和空间科学，促进航天事业全面、协调的发展。
    Sticking to integrated planning, combination of long-term development and short-term development, combination of spacecraft and ground equipment, and coordinated development. The Chinese government develops space technology, application and science through integrated planning and rational arrangement in the aim of promoting the comprehensive and coordinated development of China's space activities.
发展现状
     Present Situation
中国航天事业自1956年创建以来，经历了艰苦创业、配套发展、改革振兴和走向世界等几个重要时期，迄今已达到了相当规模和水平：形成了完整配套的研究、设计、生产和试验体系；建立了能发射各类卫星和载人飞船的航天器发射中心和由国内各地面站、远程跟踪测量船组成的测控网；建立了多种卫星应用系统，取得了显著的社会效益和经济效益；建立了具有一定水平的空间科学研究系统，取得了多项创新成果；培育了一支素质好、技术水平高的航天科技队伍。
Since its birth in 1956, China's space program has gone through several important stages of development: arduous pioneering, overall development in all related fields, reform and revitalization, and international cooperation. Now it has reached a considerable scale and level. A comprehensive system of research, design, production and testing has been formed. Space centers capable of launching satellites of various types and manned spacecraft as well as a TT&C (Telemetry Tracking and Command) network consisting of ground stations across the country and tracking and telemetry ships are in place. A number of satellite application systems have been established and have yielded remarkable social and economic benefits. A space science research system of a fairly high level has been set up and many innovative achievements have been made. And a contingent of qualified space scientists and technicians has come to the fore.
中国航天事业是在基础工业比较薄弱、科技水平相对落后和特殊的国情、特定的历史条件下发展起来的。中国独立自主地进行航天活动，以较少的投入，在较短的时间里，走出了一条适合本国国情和有自身特色的发展道路，取得了一系列重要成就。中国在卫星回收、一箭多星、低温燃料火箭技术、捆绑火箭技术以及静止轨道卫星发射与测控等许多重要技术领域已跻身世界先进行列；在遥感卫星研制及其应用、通信卫星研制及其应用、载人飞船试验以及空间微重力实验等方面均取得重大成果。
China's space industry was developed on the basis of weak infrastructure industries and a relatively backward scientific and technological level, under special national and historical conditions. In the process of carrying out space activities independently, China has opened a road of development unique to its national situation and scored a series of important achievements with relatively small input and within a relatively short span of time. Now, China ranks among the most advanced countries in the world in many important technological fields, such as satellite recovery, multi-satellite launch with a single rocket, rockets with cryogenic fuel, strap-on rockets, launch of geo-stationary satellites and TT&C. Significant achievements have also been gained in the development and application of remote-sensing satellites and telecommunications satellites, and in manned spacecraft testing and space micro-gravity experiments.
空间技术
Space Technology
　　人造地球卫星。中国于1970年4月24日成功地研制并发射了第一颗人造地球卫星“东方红一号”，成为世界上第五个独立自主研制和发射人造地球卫星的国家。截至2000年10月，中国共研制并发射了47颗不同类型的人造地球卫星，飞行成功率达90%以上。目前，中国已初步形成了四个卫星系列——返回式遥感卫星系列、“东方红”通信广播卫星系列、“风云”气象卫星系列和“实践”科学探测与技术试验卫星系列，“资源”地球资源卫星系列也即将形成。中国是世界上第三个掌握卫星回收技术的国家，卫星回收成功率达到国际先进水平；中国是世界上第五个独立研制和发射地球静止轨道通信卫星的国家。中国的气象卫星、地球资源卫星主要技术指标已达到二十世纪九十年代初期的国际水平。近几年来，中国研制并发射的6颗通信、地球资源和气象卫星投入使用后，工作稳定，性能良好，产生了很好的社会效益和经济效益。
　 Man-made Satellites: China's first man-made satellite, the "Dongfanghong-I," was successfully developed and launched on April 24, 1970, making China the fifth country in the world with such capability. By October 2000, China had developed and launched 47 satellites of various types, with a flight success rate of over 90%. Altogether, four satellite series have been initially development in China, namely, recoverable remote-sensing satellites, "DFH (Dongfanghong)" telecommunications satellites, "FY (Fengyun)" meteorological satellites and "SJ (Shijian)" scientific research and technological experiment satellites. The "ZY (Ziyuan)" earth resource satellite series will come into being soon. China is the third country in the world to have mastered the technology of satellite recovery, with the success rate reaching the advanced international level, and the fifth country capable of developing and launching geo-stationary telecommunications satellites independently. The major technological index of China's meteorological and earth resource satellites has reached the international level of the early 1990s. The six telecommunications, earth resources and meteorological satellites developed and launched by China in the past few years are in stable operation, and have generated remarkable social and economic returns.
运载火箭。中国独立自主地研制了12种不同型号的“长征”系列运载火箭，适用于发射近地轨道、地球静止轨道和太阳同步轨道卫星。“长征”系列运载火箭近地轨道最大运载能力达到9200千克，地球同步转移轨道最大运载能力达到5100千克，基本能够满足不同用户的需求。自1985年中国政府正式宣布将“长征”系列运载火箭投入国际商业发射市场以来，已将27颗外国制造的卫星成功地送入太空，在国际商业卫星发射服务市场中占有了一席之地。迄今，“长征”系列运载火箭共实施了63次发射；1996年10月至2000年10月，“长征”系列运载火箭已连续21次发射成功。
Launching Vehicles: China has independently developed the "Long-March" rocket group, containing 12 types of launching vehicles capable of launching satellites to near-earth, geo-stationary and sun-synchronous orbits. The largest launching capacity of the "Long-March" rockets has reached 9,200 kg for near-earth orbit, and 5,100 kg for geo-stationary transfer orbit, able to basically meet the demands of customers of all kinds. Since 1985, when the Chinese government announced to put the "Long-March" rockets into the international commercial launching market, China has launched 27 foreign-made satellites into space, thus acquiring a share of the international commercial launching market. Up to now, the "Long-March" rockets have accomplished 63 launches, and made 21 consecutive successful flights from October 1996 to October 2000.
航天器发射场。中国已建成酒泉、西昌、太原三个航天器发射场，并圆满完成了各种运载火箭的飞行试验和各类人造卫星、试验飞船的发射任务。中国航天器发射场既可完成国内发射任务，又具有完成为国际商业发射服务和开展其他国际航天合作的能力。
Launching Sites: China has set up three launching sites - in Jiuquan, Xichang and Taiyuan - which have successfully accomplished various kinds of test flights of launching vehicles and launches of a variety of satellites and experimental spacecraft. China's spacecraft launching sites are capable of making both domestic satellite launches and international commercial launches, and carrying out international space cooperation in other fields.
航天测控。中国已建成完整的航天测控网，包括陆地测控站和海上测控船，圆满完成了从近地轨道卫星到地球静止轨道卫星、从卫星到试验飞船的航天测控任务。中国航天测控网已具备国际联网共享测控资源的能力，测控技术达到了世界先进水平。
TT&C: China has established an integrated TT&C network comprising TT&C ground stations and ships, which has successfully accomplished TT&C missions for near-earth orbit and geo-stationary orbit satellites, and experimental spacecraft. This network has acquired the capability of sharing TT&C resources with international network, and its technology has reached the international advanced level.
载人航天。中国于1992年开始实施载人飞船航天工程，研制了载人飞船和高可靠运载火箭，开展了航天医学和空间生命科学的工程研究，选拔了预备航天员，研制了一批空间遥感和空间科学试验装置。1999年11月20日至21日，中国成功地发射并回收了第一艘“神舟”号无人试验飞船，标志着中国已突破了载人飞船的基本技术，在载人航天领域迈出了重要步伐。
Manned Spaceflight: Initiating its manned spaceflight program in 1992, China has developed a manned spacecraft and high-reliability launching vehicle, carried out engineering studies in aerospace medicine and aerospace life science, selected reserve astronauts and developed equipment for aerospace remote-sensing and aerospace scientific experiments. China's first unmanned experimental spacecraft - "Shenzhou" was successfully launched and recovered November 20-21, 1999, symbolizing a breakthrough in the basic technologies of manned spacecraft and a significant step forward in the field of manned spaceflight.
空间应用
　Space Applications
中国重视研制各种应用卫星和开发卫星应用技术，在卫星遥感、卫星通信、卫星导航定位等方面取得了长足发展。中国研制和发射的卫星中，遥感卫星和通信卫星约占71%，这些卫星已广泛应用于经济、科技、文化和国防建设的各个领域，取得了显著的社会效益和经济效益。国家有关部门还积极利用国外各种应用卫星开展应用技术研究，取得了很好的应用效果。
China attaches importance to developing all kinds of application satellites and satellite application technology, and has made great progress in satellite remote-sensing, satellite telecom and satellite navigation. Remote-sensing and telecommunications satellites account for about 71% of the total number of satellites developed and launched by China. These satellites have been widely utilized in all aspects of economy, science and technology, culture, and national defense, and yielded remarkable social and economic returns. Related departments of the state have also made active use of foreign application satellites for application technology studies, with satisfactory results.
　　卫星遥感。中国从二十世纪七十年代初期开始利用国内外遥感卫星，开展卫星遥感应用技术的研究、开发和推广工作，在气象、地矿、测绘、农林、水利、海洋、地震和城市建设等方面得到了广泛应用。目前，国家遥感中心、国家卫星气象中心、中国资源卫星应用中心、卫星海洋应用中心和中国遥感卫星地面接收站等机构，以及国务院有关部委、部分省市和中国科学院的卫星遥感应用研究机构已经建立起来。这些专业机构利用国内外遥感卫星开展了气象预报、国土普查、作物估产、森林调查、灾害监测、环境保护、海洋预报、城市规划和地图测绘等多方面、多领域的应用研究工作。特别是卫星气象地面应用系统的业务化运行，极大地提高了对灾害性天气预报的准确性，使国家和人民群众的经济损失有了明显的减少。
 Satellite Remote-Sensing: China began to use domestic and foreign remote-sensing satellites in the early 1970s, and eventually carried out studies, development and promotion of satellite remote-sensing application technology, which has been widely applied in meteorology, mining, surveying, agriculture, forestry, water conservancy, oceanography, seismology and urban planning. To date, China has established the National Remote- Sensing Center, National Satellite Meteorology Center, China Resources Satellite Application Center, Satellite Oceanic Application Center and China Remote-Sensing Satellite Ground Station, as well as satellite remote-sensing application institutes under related ministries of the State Council, some provinces and municipalities and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. These institutions have made use of both domestic and foreign remote- sensing satellites to carry out application studies in weather forecasting, territorial survey, agricultural output assessment, forest survey, natural disaster monitoring, maritime forecasting, urban planning and mapping. The regular operation of the meteorological satellite ground application system, in particular, has greatly improved the accuracy of forecasting disastrous weather and significantly reduced the economic losses of the state and people from such weather.
卫星通信。中国从二十世纪八十年代中期开始利用国内外通信卫星，发展卫星通信技术，以满足日益增长的通信、广播和教育事业的发展需求。在卫星固定通信业务方面，全国建有数十座大中型卫星通信地球站，联结世界180多个国家和地区的国际卫星通信话路达2.7万多条。中国已建成国内卫星公众通信网，国内卫星通信话路达7万多条，初步解决了边远地区的通信问题。甚小口径终端(VSAT)通信业务近几年发展较快，已有国内甚小口径终端通信业务经营单位30个，服务小站用户15000个，其中双向小站用户超过6300个；同时建立了金融、气象、交通、石油、水利、民航、电力、卫生和新闻等几十个部门的80多个专用通信网，甚小口径终端上万个。在卫星电视广播业务方面，中国已建成覆盖全球的卫星电视广播系统和覆盖全国的卫星电视教育系统。中国从1985年开始利用卫星传送广播电视节目，目前已形成了占用33个通信卫星转发器的卫星传输覆盖网，负责传送中央、地方电视节目和教育电视节目共计47套，以及中央32路对内、对外广播节目和近40套地方广播节目。卫星教育电视广播开播十多年来，有3000多万人接受了大、中专教育与培训。近年来，中国建成了卫星直播试验平台，通过数字压缩方式将中央和地方的卫星电视节目传送到无线广播电视覆盖不到的广大农村地区，使中国广播电视的覆盖率有了很大提高。中国现有卫星电视广播接收站约18.9万座。在卫星直播试验平台上，还建立了中国教育卫星宽带多媒体传输网络，面向全国开展远程教育和信息技术的综合服务。
Satellite Telecommunications: In the mid-1980s, China began to utilize domestic and foreign telecommunications satellites, and developed related technology to meet the increasing demands of the development of telecommunications, broad- casting and education. In the field of fixed telecom service, China has built scores of large and medium-sized satellite telecom earth stations, with more than 27,000 international satellite telephone channels connected to more than 180 countries and regions worldwide. The establishment of the domestic satellite public communication network, with more than 70,000 satellite telephone channels, has initially solved the problem of communication in remote areas. The VSAT (Very Small Aperture Terminal) communication service has developed very rapidly in recent years. There are now in the country 30 domestic VSAT communication service providers and 15,000 small-station users, including over 6,300 two-way users. More than 80 specialized communication networks for dozens of departments like finance, meteorology, transportation, oil, water resources, civil aviation, power, public health and the media have been built, with over 10,000 VSAT. A satellite TV broadcasting system covering the whole world and a satellite TV education system covering the whole country have been established. China started to use satellites for TV broadcasting in 1985, and has formed a satellite transmission network with 33 telecommunications satellite transponders responsible for transmitting 47 TV programs and educational TV programs of CCTV (China Central Television) and local TV stations throughout the country, 32 programs of the Central Broadcasting Station domestically and abroad, and about 40 local broadcasting programs. Ever since the opening of satellite education TV broadcasting programs over a dozen years ago, more than 30 million people have got college or secondary technical school education and training through it. China has also set up a satellite direct broadcasting experimental platform to transmit CCTV and local satellite TV programs by digital compression to the vast rural areas which wireless TV broad- casting cannot cover. In this way, China's TV broadcasting coverage has been greatly increased. China has about 189,000 satellite TV broadcasting receiving stations. The China broad-band multi-media education satellite transmission network has also been established on the satellite direct broadcasting experimental platform to provide comprehensive remote education and information technology services.
卫星导航定位。中国从二十世纪八十年代初期开始利用国外导航卫星，开展卫星导航定位应用技术开发工作，并在大地测量、船舶导航、飞机导航、地震监测、地质防灾监测、森林防火灭火和城市交通管理等许多行业得到了广泛应用。中国在1992年加入了国际低轨道搜索和营救卫星组织(COSPAS-SARSAT)，以后还建立了中国任务控制中心，大大提高了船舶、飞机和车辆遇险报警服务能力。
Satellite Navigation: In the early 1980s, China began to utilize other countries' navigation satellites and develop the application technology of satellite navigation and positioning, which is now widely used in many fields including land survey, ship navigation, aircraft navigation, earthquake monitoring, geological calamity monitoring, forest fire prevention and control, and urban traffic control. After joining the COSPAS-SARSAT in 1992, China established the Chinese Mission Control Center, thus greatly improving the capability of the emergency alarm service for ships, aircraft and vehicles.
空间科学
Space Science
中国在二十世纪六十年代初期开始利用探空火箭、探空气球开展了高层大气探测。在七十年代初期开始利用“实践”系列科学探测与技术试验卫星开展了一系列空间探测和研究，获得了很多宝贵的环境探测资料。近年来，开展了空间天气预报的研究工作及相应的国际合作。从八十年代末开始利用返回型遥感卫星进行了多种空间科学实验，在晶体和蛋白质生长、细胞培养、作物育种等方面取得了很好的成果。中国空间科学在基础理论研究方面取得了若干创新成果，在空间物理学、微重力科学和空间生命科学等领域建立了具有一定水平的对外开放的国家级实验室，建立了空间有效载荷应用中心，具有支持进行空间科学实验的基本能力。近年来，利用“实践”系列科学探测与技术试验卫星对近地空间环境中的带电粒子及其效应进行了较为详细的探测，并首次完成了微重力流体物理两层流体空间实验，实现了空间实验的遥操作。
China started to explore the upper atmosphere using rockets and balloons in the early 1960s. In the early 1970s, China began to utilize the scientific exploration and technological testing satellites of the "SJ" group in a series of space explorations and studies, and acquired a large amount of valuable data about the space environment. Research on space weather forecasting and related international cooperation have also been carried out in recent years. In the late 1980s, recoverable remote-sensing satellites were employed for various kinds of aerospace scientific experiments, and have yielded satisfactory achievements in crystal and protein growth, cell cultivation and crop breeding. Innovative achievements have been scored in the study of basic theory of space science. The establishment of advanced and open state-level laboratories specializing in space physics, micro- gravity and space life science, and the founding of the Space Payload Application Center provide the country with the basic ability to support aerospace scientific experiments. The "SJ" group has been used in recent years to detect charged particles in terrestrial space and their effects. In addition, the first micro- gravity space experiment on double-layer fluid was accomplished, in which remote operation of space experiments was realized.
　　随着中国社会主义市场经济体制的初步建立和不断完善，国家通过宏观调控引导中国航天活动的发展方向，统筹规划空间技术、空间应用和空间科学的发展，推动航天领域中重大技术的研究开发和系统集成，促进航天科技在经济、科技、文化和国防建设等方面的应用，深化航天科技工业的改革，实现航天事业的持续发展。国家加强法制建设和政策管理，建立航天法规体系，制定航天产业技术政策，保证航天活动有序、规范发展。国家鼓励科研机构、工业企业、商业企业和高等院校在国家航天政策引导下，发挥各自优势，积极参与航天活动。国家支持航天科技创新，构建有中国特色的航天创新体系，提高自主创新能力，积极推进中国航天技术实现产业化。国家支持公益性航天活动以及具有商业前景的航天研究开发工作，并不断强化对航天行业的监督。中国国家航天局是中华人民共和国负责民用卫星管理及相关的政府间国际空间合作的政府机构。
    With the establishment and improvement of China's socialist market economic mechanism, the state guides the development of space activities through macro-control, makes overall plans for the development of space technology, space application and space science, promotes the R&D and system integration of important space technologies and the application of space science and technology in the fields of economy, science and technology, culture, and national defense. The state has also carried out reforms in the space science and technology industry to achieve sustainable development of the space industry. The state has strengthened legislation work and policy management, enacted laws and regulations and promulgated industrial policies for the space industry to ensure orderly and standardized development of space activities. Research institutions, industrial enterprises, commercial enterprises and institutions of higher learning are encouraged to make full use of their advantages and participate in space activities under the guidance of the state's space policies. The state supports renovation in space technology and the establishment of a space technological renovation system with Chinese characteristics, with the aim of improving the self-renovation capability and industrialization of space activities. Space activities for public welfare and R&D work with commercial prospects are also supported by the state, and the state's supervision over space activities is being continuously strengthened. The China National Space Administration (CNSA) is China's govern- mental organization responsible for the management of satellites for civilian use and inter-governmental space cooperation with other countries.
未来发展
     Future Development
二十一世纪将是世界航天活动蓬勃发展的新世纪。中国根据国家发展的现实需求和长远目标，正在制定面向二十一世纪的航天发展战略和规划，加快发展航天事业。
The 21st Century will witness vigorous development of space activities across the world. China is drafting a space development strategy and plans oriented to the 21st century according to the actual demands and long-term target of national development to spur the growth of the space industry.
发展目标
Development Targets
近期(今后十年或稍后的一个时期)发展目标：
The short-term development targets (for the next decade) are:
建立长期稳定运行的卫星对地观测体系。以气象卫星系列、资源卫星系列、海洋卫星系列和环境与灾害监测小卫星群组成长期稳定运行的卫星对地观测体系，实现对中国及周边地区甚至全球的陆地、大气、海洋的立体观测和动态监测。
To build up an earth observation system for long-term stable operation. The meteorological satellites, resource satellites, oceanic satellites and disaster monitoring satellites can develop into an earth observation system for long-term stable operation to conduct stereoscopic observation and dynamic monitoring of the land, atmosphere, and oceanic environments of the country, the peripheral regions and even the whole globe;
建立自主经营的卫星广播通信系统。积极支持商用广播通信卫星的发展，开发长寿命、高可靠的大容量地球静止轨道通信卫星和电视直播卫星，初步建成中国卫星通信产业。
To set up an independently operated satellite broadcasting and telecommunications system. Positive support will be given to the development of commercial broadcasting and telecommunications satellites such as geo-stationary telecom satellites and TV direct broadcasting satellites with long operating life, high reliability and large capacity, so as to form China's satellite telecom industry;
建立自主的卫星导航定位系统。分步建立导航定位卫星系列，开发卫星导航定位应用系统，初步建成中国的卫星导航定位应用产业。
To establish an independent satellite navigation and positioning system. This will be achieved by setting up a navigation and positioning satellite group step by step and developing a relevant application system, which will eventually bring into being China's satellite navigation and positioning industry;
全面提高中国运载火箭的整体水平和能力。提高现有“长征”系列运载火箭的性能和可靠性；开发新一代无毒、无污染、高性能和低成本的运载火箭，建成新一代运载火箭型谱化系列，增强参与国际商业发射服务的能力。
To upgrade the overall level and capacity of China's launching vehicles. This will be achieved by improving the performance and reliability of the "Long-March" group, developing the next generation of launching vehicles with non-toxic, non-polluting, high-performance and low-cost qualities, forming a new group of launching vehicles and strengthening the capability of providing international commercial launching services;
实现载人航天飞行，建立初步配套的载人航天工程研制试验体系。
To realize manned spaceflight and establish an initially complete R&D and testing system for manned space projects;
建立协调配套的全国卫星遥感应用体系。统一规划和建设各种卫星遥感地面应用系统，建立覆盖全国的地面卫星遥感数据接收、处理和分发系统，实现资源共享；在对地卫星遥感主要应用领域，形成较完整的业务化应用体系。
To establish a coordinated and complete national satellite remote-sensing application system by building various related ground application systems through overall planning, setting up a remote-sensing data receiving, processing and distributing system covering the whole country for data sharing, and forming a fairly complete application system in major application fields of satellite remote-sensing; and
发展空间科学，开展深空探测。建立新型的科学探测与技术试验卫星系列，加强空间微重力、空间材料科学、空间生命科学、空间环境和空间天文研究；开展以月球探测为主的深空探测的预先研究。
To develop space science and explore outer space by developing a scientific research and technological experiment satellite group of the next generation, strengthening studies of space micro-gravity, space material science, space life science, space environment and space astronomy, and carrying out pre-study for outer space exploration centering on the exploration of the moon.
远期(今后二十年或稍后的一个时期)发展目标：
The long-term development targets (for the next 20 years or more) are as follows:
空间技术和空间应用实现产业化和市场化，空间资源的开发利用满足经济建设、国家安全、科技发展和社会进步的广泛需求，进一步增强综合国力。
To achieve industrialization and marketization of space technology and space applications. The exploration and utilization of space resources shall meet a wide range of demands of economic construction, state security, science and technology development and social progress, and contribute to the strengthening of the comprehensive national strength;
按照国家整体规划，建成多种功能和多种轨道的、由多种卫星系统组成的空间基础设施；建成天地协调配套的卫星地面应用系统，形成完整、连续、长期稳定运行的天地一体化网络系统。
To establish a multi-function and multi-orbit space infrastructure composed of various satellite systems and set up a satellite ground application system that harmonizes spacecraft and ground equipment to form an integrated ground-space network system in full, constant and long-term operation in accordance with the overall planning of the state;
建立中国的载人航天体系，开展一定规模的载人空间科学研究和技术试验。
To establish China's own manned spaceflight system and carry out manned spaceflight scientific research and technological experiments on a certain scale; and
空间科学取得众多成果，在世界空间科学领域占有较重要的地位，开展有特色的深空探测和研究。
To obtain a more important place in the world in the field of space science with more achievements and carry out explorations and studies of outer space.
发展思路
Development Concepts
中国航天事业的发展思路是：
China develops its space activities with the following approaches:
促进空间技术及应用实现产业化。引导和鼓励航天科技企业制度创新和技术创新，建立面向国内外市场的运行机制，以通信卫星和卫星通信、运载火箭为重点，分步实施，推进空间技术及应用产业化进程。
Accelerating the industrialization of space technology and its application. Enterprises engaged in space science and technology are guided and encouraged to renovate institutions and technology, and establish an operational mechanism geared toward both the domestic and international markets, so as to speed up the industrialization of space technology and its applications step by step, with the stress on telecom satellites and satellite telecom and launching vehicles.
合理部署各种航天活动。统筹规划，协调发展空间技术、空间应用与空间科学。采用“优先安排”、“积极支持”、“适度发展”和“跟踪研究”四种不同方式部署航天活动三个领域的各项工作，以实现中国航天事业的全面、协调发展。
Deploying space activities rationally. Space science, technology and application shall be developed in a well- coordinated manner through overall planning. The work in these three fields will be given differentiated importance from "preferential arrangement," "active support" and "proper development" to "follow-up studies," so as to ensure the comprehensive and coordinated development of China's space industry.
加强预先研究和技术基础建设。集中力量攻克重大关键技术，掌握核心技术，形成自主知识产权；同时加强航天活动三个领域的技术基础建设，扩大国际空间合作，继续保持中国航天事业的发展势头。
Strengthening pre-study and technological infrastructure construction. Efforts will be concentrated on tackling key technological problems to grasp core technology and attain independent intellectual property rights. At the same time, technological infrastructure construction will be strengthened in the three aspects of space activities, and international cooperation will be broadened to sustain the development momentum of China's space industry.
加速航天科技队伍建设，构筑航天人才优势。发展航天教育，培养航天人才，采取特殊政策，加速造就一支高水平的、年轻的航天科技队伍。普及航天知识，宣传航天事业，动员社会各界力量支持航天事业的发展。
Speeding up the development of talented people in the space industry and forming advantages in this regard. Special policies will be adopted to promote space education and train qualified personnel to foster a contingent of young and highly qualified space scientists and engineers. Efforts will be made to publicize space knowledge, and motivate all sectors of society to support the development of the space industry.
加强科学管理，提高质量和效益。针对航天活动投资大、风险大、技术密集、系统复杂等特点，运用系统工程等现代管理手段，加强科学管理，提高系统质量，降低系统风险，提高综合效益。
Improving scientific management for better quality and benefits. Since space activities involve huge investments, high risks, sophisticated technology and complicated systems, systems engineering and other modern management tolls shall be applied to promote scientific management, increase system quality, lower system risks and enhance comprehensive benefits.
    
国际合作
     International Cooperation
中国一贯支持和平利用外层空间的各种活动，主张在平等互利、取长补短、共同发展的基础上，增进和加强空间领域的国际合作。
China persistently supports activities involving the peaceful use of outer space, and maintains that international space cooperation shall be promoted and strengthened on the basis of equality and mutual benefit, mutual complementarity and common development.
指导原则
Guiding Principles
中国政府认为，国际空间合作应遵循1996年第五十一届联合国大会通过的《关于开展探索和利用外层空间的国际合作，促进所有国家的福利和利益，并特别要考虑到发展中国家的需要的宣言》(“国际空间合作宣言”)中提出的基本原则。中国政府在开展国际空间合作中，一贯坚持以下指导原则：
The Chinese government holds that international space cooperation should follow the fundamental principles listed in the "Declaration on International Cooperation on Exploring and Utilizing Outer Space for the Benefits and Interests of All Countries, Especially in Consideration of Developing Countries' Demands," which was approved by the 51st session of the UN General Assembly in 1996. China adheres to the following principles while carrying out international space cooperation:
国际空间合作应以和平开发和利用空间资源，为全人类谋取福利为宗旨。
The aim of international space cooperation is to peacefully develop and use space resources for the benefit of all mankind.
国际空间合作应在平等互利、优势互补、取长补短、共同发展以及公认的国际法原则的基础上进行。
International space cooperation should be carried out on the basis of equality and mutual benefit, mutual complementarity and common development, and the generally accepted principles of international law.
国际空间合作的优先目标是共同提高各国，特别是发展中国家的航天能力，享受航天技术的惠益。
The priority aim of international space cooperation is to simultaneously increase the capability of space development of all countries, particularly the developing countries, and enable all countries to enjoy the benefits of space technology.
国际空间合作应采取必要措施保护空间环境和空间资源。
Necessary measures should be adopted to protect the space environment and space resources in the course of international space cooperation.
支持加强联合国外空委员会的作用，支持联合国的外空应用方案。
The function of the United Nations Office of Outer Space Affairs (OOSA) should be consolidated and the outer space application programs of the United Nations shall be backed up.
基本政策
Fundamental Policies
中国政府在开展国际空间合作中采取以下基本政策：
The Chinese Government adopts the following policies in developing international space cooperation:
坚持独立自主的方针，根据国家现代化建设的需要，以及国内外航天科技的市场需求，开展积极、务实的国际空间合作。
Persisting in the independence and self-reliance policy, carrying out active and pragmatic international space cooperation to meet the needs of the national modernization drive and the demands of the domestic and international markets for space science and technology.
支持联合国系统内开展的和平利用外层空间的多边国际合作。
Supporting multilateral international cooperation on the peaceful use of outer space within the framework of the United Nations.
重视亚太地区的区域性空间合作，支持世界其他区域性空间合作。
Attaching importance to the Asian-Pacific regional space cooperation and supporting space cooperation in other regions of the world.
重视与发达的空间国家的空间合作，同时加强与发展中国家的空间合作。
Attaching importance to space cooperation with both developed and developing countries.
鼓励和支持国内外科研机构、工业企业和高等院校，在国家有关政策和法规的指导下，开展多层次、多形式的国际空间交流与合作。
Enhancing and supporting research institutions, industrial enterprises and universities and colleges to develop international space exchanges and cooperation in different forms and at different levels under the guidance of relevant state policies, laws and regulations.
主要活动
Important Events
中国在空间领域的国际合作始于二十世纪七十年代中期。二十多年来，中国开展了双边合作、区域合作、多边合作以及商业发射服务等多种形式的国际空间合作，取得了广泛的成果。
China's participation in international space cooperation started at the mid-1970s. During the last two decades or more, China has joined bilateral, regional, multi-lateral and international space cooperation in different forms, such as commercial launching service, which have yielded extensive achievements.
　　双边合作。1985年以来，中国先后与美国、意大利、德国、英国、法国、日本、瑞典、阿根廷、巴西、俄罗斯、乌克兰、智利等十多个国家签订了政府间、政府部门间空间科学技术及应用合作协定、议定书或备忘录，建立了长期的合作关系。双边合作的形式多种多样，从制定互利的空间计划、互派专家学者、组织研讨会，到共同研制卫星或卫星部件、进行卫星搭载服务、提供商业发射服务等等。
 Bilateral Cooperation: Since 1985, China has successively signed inter-governmental or inter-agency cooperative agreements, protocols or memorandums, and established long-term cooperative relations with a dozen countries, including the United States, Italy, Germany, Britain, France, Japan, Sweden, Argentina, Brazil, Russia, Ukraine and Chile. Bilateral space cooperation is implemented in various forms, from making reciprocal space programs and exchanges of scholars and specialists, and sponsoring symposiums, to jointly developing satellites or satellite parts, and providing satellite piggyback service and commercial launching service.
1993年，中国与德国合资成立了华德宇航技术公司。1995年中国与德国、法国的宇航公司签订了“鑫诺一号”卫星的研制生产合同，并于1998年发射成功。这是中国与欧洲宇航界的首次卫星合作。
In 1993, a Sino-German joint venture - EurasSpace GmbH - was established, and a contract on the development and manufacture of Sinosat-1 was signed with DASA and Aerospeciale in 1995. Sinosat-1, which was successfully launched in 1998, was the first cooperative project on satellite development between the Chinese and European aerospace industries.
中国与巴西开展的地球资源卫星合作进展顺利。1999年10月14日，中国成功地发射了第一颗中巴地球资源卫星。中巴双方除了整星合作外，在卫星技术、卫星应用以及卫星零部件等方面也开展了多项合作。中巴在空间领域的合作是发展中国家之间在高科技领域进行“南南合作”的典范。
The collaboration between China and Brazil on the project of an earth resources satellite is making good progress, and the first such satellite was successfully launched by China on October 14, 1999. In addition to cooperation on complete satellites, China and Brazil are cooperating in the areas of satellite technology, satellite application and satellite components. The cooperation between China and Brazil in the space sector has set a good example for the developing countries in "South-South Cooperation" in the high-tech field.
区域合作。中国十分重视亚太地区的区域性空间合作。1992年，中国与泰国、巴基斯坦等国联合倡导并发起了“亚太地区空间技术与应用多边合作研讨会”。在此区域合作的推动下，中国、伊朗、韩国、蒙古、巴基斯坦和泰国等六国政府于1998年4月在曼谷签署了《关于多任务小卫星项目及有关活动合作的谅解备忘录》；除签字国外，其他亚太国家也可以加入。该合作项目的确定，促进了亚太区域空间技术和应用的发展。
Regional Cooperation: China attaches great importance to space cooperation in the Asian-Pacific region. In 1992, China, Thailand, Pakistan and some other countries jointly sponsored the "Asian-Pacific Multilateral Space Technology Cooperation Symposium." Thanks to the impetus of such regional cooperation, the governments of China, Iran, the Republic of Korea, Mongolia, Pakistan and Thailand signed the "Memorandum of Under- standing on Cooperation in Small Multi-Mission Satellite and Related Activities" in Thailand in April, 1998. Besides the signatory countries, other countries in the Asian-Pacific region may also join the cooperative project, which has helped to enhance the progress of space technology and space application in the Asian-Pacific region.
多边合作。1980年6月，中国首次派出观察员代表团参加了联合国外空委员会第二十三届会议，同年11月3日，联合国正式接纳中国为该委员会成员国。此后，中国参加了历届联合国外空委员会及其下属的科技和法律小组委员会届会。中国于1983年和1988年先后加入了联合国制定的《外空条约》、《营救协定》、《责任公约》和《登记公约》，并严格履行有关责任和义务。
Multilateral Cooperation: In June 1980, China dispatched an observer delegation to the 23rd Meeting of UN COPUOS for the first time, and on November 3, 1980, China became a member country of the committee. Since then, China has participated in all the meetings of UN COPUOS and the annual meetings held by its Science, Technology and Law Sub- committee. In 1983 and 1988, China acceded to the "Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, Including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies," "Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space," "Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects," and "Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space," and has strictly performed its responsibilities and obligations.
中国支持和参与了联合国空间应用方案的实施。1988年以来，中国每年都向发展中国家提供一定数额、为期一年的长期培训奖学金。1994年，中国政府与联合国亚太经社会合作在北京召开了首届亚太区域“空间应用促进可持续发展部长级会议”，并发表了具有深远影响的《北京宣言》。1999年9月，中国政府与联合国和欧空局合作，在北京举办了“空间应用促进农业可持续发展研讨会”。2000年7月至8月，中国政府有关部门与联合国外空司和亚太经社会合作，在北京举办了“亚太地区空间技术与应用卫星技术短期培训班”，来自亚太地区十个发展中国家的学员参加了培训。
China supports and has participated in the UN space application program. Since 1988, China has provided other developing countries every year with scholarships for long-term space technology training. In 1994, together with ESCAP, China hosted in Beijing the first Asian-Pacific regional "Ministerial Conference on Space Applications for Sustainable Development in Asia and the Pacific," and the "Beijing Declaration" issued after the conference has had a far-reaching influence. In September 1999, in collaboration with the UN and ESA, the Chinese government held in Beijing the "Symposium on Promoting Sustainable Agricultural Development with Space Applications." From July to August 2000, together with the OOSA of the UN and ESCAP, relevant departments of the Chinese government opened the Short-term Training Course for Asian-Pacific Multilateral Cooperation in Space Technology and Applications. Trainees from ten developing countries in the Asian-Pacific region attended the course.
空间碎片问题是人类进一步开展航天活动所面临的一个重大挑战。中国有关部门十分重视空间碎片问题，从二十世纪八十年代开始与有关国家开展了这方面的研究工作。1995年6月，中国国家航天局正式加入了“机构间空间碎片协调委员会”。中国将继续与各国共同探讨缓减空间碎片的途径和办法，积极推进这一领域的国际合作。
The issue of space debris is a big challenge to further expansion of space activities. The relevant departments in China pay great attention to the problem, and have carried out research on this issue with related countries since the beginning of the 1980s. In June 1995, CNSA acceded to the Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee. China will continuously make efforts to explore, together with other countries, ways and means to mitigate and reduce space debris, and promote international cooperation on this issue.
中国还参加了诸如“国际对地观测委员会”、“世界天气监测”、“联合国减灾十年”、“国际日地能量计划”等多边合作项目。
　In addition, China has participated in multilateral cooperative projects, such as "Committee on Earth Observation Satellites," "World Weather Monitoring," "UN Decade of Disaster Mitigation," and "International Solar Terrestrial Physics."
商业发射服务。自1985年中国政府宣布“长征”系列运载火箭投放国际市场，承揽国际卫星发射服务业务以来，至2000年10月，先后为巴基斯坦、澳大利亚、瑞典、美国、菲律宾、巴西等国家及中国用户成功地发射了27颗国外制造的卫星。“长征”系列运载火箭进入国际卫星发射服务市场，是对国际商业卫星发射服务的有益补充，也为国外用户提供了新的选择。
Commercial Launching Service: Ever since the Chinese government made the declaration in 1985 that China's "Long March" launching vehicles would serve the international market and provide international satellite launching service, up to October 2000, China has successfully launched 27 foreign-made satellites for users in Pakistan, Australia, Sweden, the United States, the Philippines, as well as domestic users. The service of "Long March" launching vehicles in the international satellite launching market is a beneficial supplement to international commercial satellite launching services, and it has provided foreign clients with new options.
优先领域
Priority Cooperation Areas
中国政府继续支持在空间技术、空间应用和空间科学等领域开展国际交流与合作，将优先开展以下几方面的国际合作：
The Chinese government will continuously render support to international exchanges and cooperation in space technology, space applications and space science, with priority being given to cooperation in the following areas:
积极推动亚太地区空间技术与应用多边合作，利用空间技术促进区域经济发展以及环境和灾害监测。
Actively enhancing multilateral cooperation in space technology and applications in the Asian-Pacific region, and promoting regional economic growth and environmental and natural calamity monitoring with space technology.
支持中国航天企业在平等、公平、互利的原则下积极参与国际航天商业发射服务。
Supporting Chinese space enterprises to participate in international space commercial launching services in line with the principles of equality, equity and reciprocity.
支持利用中国成熟的空间技术和空间应用技术，在互惠互利的基础上与发展中国家开展合作，为合作国家提供服务。
Giving support to using China's mature space technology and space application technology to carry out cooperation with other developing countries and provide services to cooperating countries on the basis of mutual benefit.
支持开展地球环境监测、空间环境探测、微重力科学、空间物理和空间天文等研究领域的国际交流与合作，特别是微重力流体物理、空间材料科学、空间生命科学与空间生物技术等研究领域的国际交流与合作。
Supporting international exchanges and cooperation in earth environment monitoring, space environmental exploration, and studies of micro-gravity science, space physics and space astronomy, particularly international exchanges and cooperation in micro-gravity fluid physics, space materials science, space life science and space biology.　

中国的禁毒
Narcotics Control in China

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室 
Information Office of the State Council of the Peoples Republic of China

二〇〇〇年六月，北京
June 2000, Beijing



目　　录
Contents

前　　言
Foreword

坚持严厉禁毒的立场
Sticking to the Position of Strict Drug Control

不断加强禁毒立法
 Constantly Strengthening Drug Control Legislation

坚决惩治毒品犯罪
 Cracking Down on Drug-related Crimes

严格管制易制毒化学品
 Exercising Strict Control over the Precursor Chemicals

矫治挽救吸毒人员
 Treatment and Rehabilitation

提高全民禁毒意识
 Raising the Consciousness of the Entire People Vs Drugs

开展国际禁毒合作
 Developing International Cooperation in Drug Control

前　　言

　　Foreword

　　当今世界，全球化的毒品问题已对人类的生存和发展构成重大威胁。据1998年联合国有关资料显示：全世界有2100万人遭受可卡因和海洛因之害，有3000万人因滥用苯丙胺类兴奋剂而受害。

　　The present globalization of the drug issue has posed a grave menace to human well-being and development. According to data published by the United Nations in 1998, 21 million people worldwide suffered from cocaine or heroin addiction, and another 30 million from the abuse of amphetamine-type stimulants.

　　中国西南边境毗邻世界最主要的毒源地“金三角”。二十世纪七十年代末期以来，国际毒潮不断侵袭中国，过境贩毒引发的毒品违法犯罪活动死灰复燃；吸毒人数持续上升，毒品案件不断增多，危害日益严重，禁毒形势严峻。1999年，全国共查获毒品犯罪案件6.5万起，缴获海洛因5.364吨、鸦片1.193吨、甲基苯丙胺(俗称“冰毒”)16.059吨，以及部分可卡因、摇头丸(MDMA)、大麻等，破案数和缴获毒品总量分别比1998年增加2.4%和33.6%。中国公安部门登记在册的吸毒人数，1991年为14.8万，1995年为52万，1999年为68.1万。现有吸毒人数占全国总人口的0.54‰，吸毒人数中，吸食海洛因的占71.5%，年龄在35岁以下的占79.2%。截至1999年底，全国累计报告的17316例艾滋病病毒感染者中，因静脉注射毒品感染的占72.4%。目前，全国各省、自治区、直辖市都程度不同地存在着与毒品有关的违法犯罪活动，中国已由毒品过境受害国转变为毒品过境与消费并存的受害国。

　　On her southwestern border China is adjacent to the "Golden Triangle,'' one of the main sources of drugs in the world. Since the late 1970s, the illicit international narcotics tide has constantly invaded China, and criminal drug-related activities touched off by transit drug trafficking have re-emerged. The number of drug addicts has kept rising, drug-related cases have constantly increased, the drug scourge is becoming more serious with each passing day, and the situation is grim for the anti-drug struggle. In 1999, China cracked down 65,000 drug-related criminal cases, and confiscated 5.364 tons of heroin, 1.193 tons of opium, 16.059 tons of crystal methamphetamine (commonly known as "ice''), and some cocaine, MDMA and marijuana. In 1999, the number of drug-related cases cracked and the total amount of drugs confiscated increased by 2.4 percent and 33.6 percent, respectively, over 1998. The number of drug addicts registered with the public security organs in 1999 was 148,000, a figure which rose to 520,000 in 1995, and to 681,000 in 1999. Now drug addicts account for 0.054 percent of China's total population. Of the drug addicts, those taking heroin make up 71.5 percent, and those under the age of 35 amount to 79.2 percent. By the end of 1999, of a total of 17,316 reported cases of AIDS virus infection, those infected by intravenous injections of drugs made up 72.4 percent. At present, each province, autonomous region, and municipality directly under the Central Government in China suffers from illegal drug-related activities to a certain extent, and China has been turned from a victim of the transit drug trade into a victim of both drug transit and consumption.

    毒品祸国殃民。
Illicit drugs bring calamity to any country and people. 
开展禁毒斗争，扫除毒品祸害，是中国政府的历史责任。
Launching an anti-drug struggle to eliminate the drug scourge is the historical responsibility of the Chinese government. 
在旧中国，毒品曾给中华民族带来深重灾难。
In old China, drugs once brought hideous disaster to the nation. 
1949年中华人民共和国成立后，中国政府领导人民开展了声势浩大的禁毒斗争，在短短三年时间里，一举禁绝了为患百年的鸦片烟毒，创造了举世公认的奇迹。面对新的毒品问题，中国政府以对国家、民族、人民和全人类高度负责的态度，坚持严厉禁毒的立场，采取一切必要措施，尽最大努力禁绝毒品，造福人民。
But after the founding of the People's Republic of China (PRC) in 1949, the Chinese government led the Chinese people in a momentous struggle against drugs. In a short period of three years, China wiped out the scourge of opium, which had scourged China for a century, thus performing a miracle acknowledged by the whole world. Confronting the new drug problem, the Chinese government, taking an attitude of supreme responsibility to the state, the nation and the people, and the mankind as a whole, and standing firm in strictly prohibiting illegal drugs, has adopted all necessary measures and done its utmost to ban illicit drugs for the benefit of the people.

　坚持严厉禁毒的立场

　　Sticking to the Position of Strict Drug Control

　　中国政府认为，毒品是全人类共同面对的世界性公害，禁毒是国际社会刻不容缓的共同责任。毒品危害人民健康，滋生犯罪和腐败，破坏可持续发展，危及国家安全和世界和平。因此，对一切毒品违法犯罪活动必须严加禁绝。

　　The Chinese government believes that drugs are a worldwide public hazard confronting the whole of mankind, and drug control is imminent and common responsibility incumbent to international society. Drugs harm people's health, give rise to corruption and crimes, disrupt sustainable development and endanger national security and world peace. Therefore, all illegal activities involving drugs must be strictly prohibited and eliminated.

　　中国人民对毒品危害有切肤之痛，禁毒是中国人民的根本利益所在。保障公民的生命安全，维护人民的生存发展，是中国政府的崇高责任。多年来，中国政府以“禁绝毒品”为根本目标，制定并实施了一系列严厉禁毒的方针、政策和措施。

　　The Chinese people feel keenly the harm of drugs, and know that drug control is in their fundamental interests. Safeguarding citizens' lives, and protecting the people's subsistence and development are the lofty responsibilities of the Chinese government. For many years, the Chinese government has taken drug control as a fundamental objective, and has formulated and implemented a series of principles, policies and measures in this regard.

　　把禁毒作为事关中华民族兴衰存亡的大事来抓。将禁毒作为一项基本政策纳入国民经济和社会发展规划，并规定为各级政府的一项重要职责，逐级建立了适合中国国情的禁毒工作责任制，保障禁毒工作常抓不懈。

    - Attending to drug control as a vital matter involving the rise and fall of the Chinese nation. We take drug control as a basic policy and include it in the program for national economic and social development, and make it an important duty of governments at all levels. The governments at all levels have set up a drug control work responsibility system that suits the actual conditions of China to maintain the permanent momentum in drug control.

　　实行综合治理的禁毒战略。把禁毒作为一项复杂的社会系统工程和长期的战略任务，综合运用法律、行政、经济、文化、教育和医疗等多种手段，动员和组织全社会力量参与禁毒斗争。

　　- Implementing a comprehensive drug control strategy. We take drug control as a complex social system project and a long-term strategic task, and use various means in a comprehensive way - law, administration, the economy, culture, education, and medical treatment, to mobilize and organize all social walks of life to participate in the anti-drug struggle.

　　坚持依法禁毒。按照依法治国的方略，不断建立健全禁毒法律法规体系，依法管理管制麻醉药品、精神药品和易制毒化学品，防范、惩治毒品犯罪，坚决打击各类毒品违法犯罪活动，开展戒毒治疗和康复工作，矫治挽救吸毒人员，确保禁毒工作在法制轨道上进行。

　　- Persisting in drug control according to law. In accordance with the general plan of exercising the rule of law, we have persisted in setting up and perfecting a system of laws and regulations concerning drug control, administered and controlled narcotics, psychotropic substances, and precursor chemicals, prevented and punished drug-related crimes. We have resolutely cracked down on various illegal activities involving drugs, started drug addiction treatment and rehabilitation, corrected, cured and rescued drug addicts, so as to guarantee that drug control work proceeds in a law-governed manner.

　　确定“‘四禁’并举、堵源截流、严格执法、标本兼治”的工作方针。坚持禁吸、禁贩、禁种、禁制，控制非法供应和防止滥用并重，禁止和打击一切从事毒品违法犯罪活动。

　　- Formulating the working principle of "promoting '4-in-1 prohibitions' simultaneously, eradicating sources of drugs and obstructing their channels of trafficking, enforcing the law strictly, and solving the problem by examining both its root causes and its symptoms.'' While prohibiting drug abuse, trafficking, cultivating and manufacturing, we lay equal stress on the control of illicit supplies and the prevention of drug abuse, forbid and crack down on all illegal activities involving drugs.

　　把预防青少年吸毒作为禁毒工作的基础工程。对青少年立足于教育和保护，采取各种有力措施，组织、协调政府有关部门和各种社会组织做好预防工作，教育青少年珍爱生命，拒绝毒品。

　　- Taking the prevention of drug abuse by teen-agers as a basic project in drug control. As for teenagers, we put stress on education and protection, adopt various powerful measures, organize and coordinate relevant government departments and various mass organizations to perfect the preventive work, and educate youngsters to treasure their lives and refuse drugs.

　　积极参与和推动国际禁毒合作。中国政府支持开展国际禁毒合作，并在国际禁毒领域认真履行三项主张：坚持广泛参与、责任共担的原则；全面实施综合、均衡的国际禁毒战略；高度重视替代发展，促进从根本上解决毒品问题。

　　- Actively participating in and promoting international cooperation in drug control. The Chinese government supports international drug control cooperation, and earnestly implements three propositions in this regard: adhering to the principle of extensive participation and shaved responsibilities; comprehensively implementing an overall and balanced international drug control strategy; and attaching great importance to alternative development to promote a solution to the drug problem for good.

　　在中国，禁毒工作由各级政府领导，公安禁毒部门主管，政府有关职能部门齐抓共管，社会团体共同参与。1990年，中国政府成立由公安部、卫生部和海关总署等25个部门组成的国家禁毒委员会，统一领导全国的禁毒工作，负责禁毒国际合作，办事机构设在公安部。1998年，国务院批准公安部成立禁毒局，该局同时又作为国家禁毒委员会的办事机构。目前，全国31个省、自治区、直辖市和大多数县(市、区)政府都建立了相应的禁毒领导机构，有24个省、自治区、直辖市及其所辖的204个地(市、州)、735个县(市、区)的公安机关组建了缉毒警察队伍。中国人民武装警察部队、公安边防、司法、海关、药品监督管理、工商行政管理等部门，也承担相应的禁毒执法任务。中国各级政府把禁毒所需经费纳入财政预算，并随着国民经济的发展和禁毒形势的需要，逐年增加投入。1998年，国务院批准成立中国禁毒基金会，广泛吸纳社会资金，支持禁毒工作。

　　In China, drug control is led by governments at all levels, in the care of the drug control departments of public security authorities, co-administered by relevant government functional departments and participated in jointly by mass organizations. In 1990, the Chinese government set up the National Narcotics Control Commission (NNCC), composed of 25 departments, including the Ministry of Public Security, Ministry of Health and General Administration of Customs. The NNCC leads the nation's drug control work in a unified way, and is responsible for international drug control cooperation, with an operational agency based in the Ministry of Public Security. In 1998, with the approval of the State Council, the Ministry of Public Security set up the Drug Control Bureau, which also serves as an operational agency of the NNCC. Now, the governments of all the 31 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities and most counties (cities and districts) in China have set up corresponding drug control leading organs. Meanwhile, the public security organs of 24 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities, and of the 204 regions (cities and prefectures), 735 counties (cities and districts) under the jurisdiction of these provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities have set up police anti-drug squads. The Chinese People's Armed Police, frontier defense force of the public security authorities, judicial departments, Customs, supervision and control organs of pharmaceuticals, and administration departments for industry and commerce also undertake corresponding anti-drug law enforce- ment tasks. Governments at all levels in China include the funds required for drug control in their financial budgets, and along with the development of the national economy and the needs of the drug control situation, the funds allocated for such purpose are expected to increase every year. In 1998, the China Narcotics Control Foundation was set up, with the approval of the State Council, aiming at collecting funds from society at large to support drug control work.
不断加强禁毒立法

　　 Constantly Strengthening Drug Control Legislation

　　中国高度重视禁毒法制建设，坚持依法禁毒。近二十多年来，针对不断蔓延的毒品问题，中国加快禁毒立法的步伐，制定颁布了一系列法律、法规，禁毒法制建设取得重大进展。

　　China attaches great importance to the building of the legal system in drug control and persists in drug control according to law. In view of the drug rampancy over the past 20-odd years, China has speeded up legislation in drug control, and has formulated and promulgated a whole array of laws and regulations, thanks to which, great progress has been made in legal system building in this field.

　　禁毒刑事立法逐步完善。1979年7月1日，第五届全国人民代表大会第二次会议制定的《中华人民共和国刑法》，专门规定了制造、贩卖、运输毒品罪及其刑罚。八十年代，全国人民代表大会常务委员会陆续颁布《中华人民共和国海关法》、《中华人民共和国治安管理处罚条例》、《关于严惩严重破坏经济的罪犯的决定》、《关于惩治走私罪的补充规定》等法律，进一步对惩治毒品违法犯罪作出规定，并将严重毒品犯罪的法定最高刑提高到死刑。1990年12月18日，第七届全国人民代表大会常务委员会第十七次会议通过的《关于禁毒的决定》，对毒品犯罪的种类及其刑罚，对吸毒者的处罚和强制戒毒等，作了全面规定，并明确规定了中国对走私、贩卖、运输、制造毒品犯罪的普遍管辖权。

　　Criminal legislation for drug control has improved step by step. On July 1, 1979, the Criminal Law of the PRC was adopted at the Second Session of the Fifth National People's Congress (NPC), which specified the crimes of manufacturing, trafficking and transporting drugs, and the relevant punishments. In the 1980s, the NPC Standing Committee issued, successively, the Customs Law of the PRC, the Regulations of the PRC on Administrative Penalties for Public Security, the Resolution on Severely Punishing Criminals Who Have Seriously Sabotaged the Economy, the Supplementary Regulations on Punishing Smuggling, and other laws, which formulated further regulations on punishing drug-related crimes and raised the highest legal punishment for serious drug-related crimes to the death penalty. On December 18, 1990, the 17th meeting of the Standing Committee of the Seventh NPC adopted the Decision on Drug Control, which included comprehensive regulations on the types of drug-related crimes and penalties, the punishments for drug addicts and compulsory drug addiction rehabilitation, and clearly specified China's universal jurisdiction over the crimes of smuggling, trafficking, transporting and manufacturing drugs.

　　1997年3月14日，第八届全国人民代表大会第五次会议对《中华人民共和国刑法》进行了修订，在吸收、保留《关于禁毒的决定》主要内容的基础上，对毒品犯罪的法律规定作了重要修改和补充，使中国的禁毒刑事立法进一步得到加强。最高人民法院、最高人民检察院对修订后的刑法作出了相关司法解释。

　　On March 14, 1997, at the Fifth Session of the Eighth NPC, the Criminal Law of the PRC was revised. On the basis of absorbing and retaining the main contents of the Decision on Drug Control, the revised Criminal Law made important amendments and supplements to the legal regulations on drug- connected crimes, thus further improving China's criminal legislation in this regard. The Supreme People's Court and the Supreme People's Procuratorate made relevant judicial interpretations of the revised Criminal Law.

　　从严惩处毒品犯罪，是中国禁毒刑事立法的显著特点之一。修订后的《中华人民共和国刑法》充分体现了这一原则。其一，对毒品犯罪种类规定齐全，确保各种毒品犯罪行为受到法律制裁。该法规定了走私、贩卖、运输、制造毒品罪，非法持有毒品罪，窝藏、转移、隐瞒毒品、毒赃罪，走私制毒物品罪，非法买卖制毒物品罪，非法种植毒品原植物罪，非法买卖、运输、携带、持有毒品原植物种子、幼苗罪，非法提供麻醉药品、精神药品罪等12个罪名及刑罚，并对毒品洗钱犯罪行为作出处罚规定。其二，对走私、贩卖、运输、制造毒品，无论数量多少，都规定要追究刑事责任，予以刑事处罚。毒品的数量以查证属实的走私、贩卖、运输、制造、非法持有毒品的数量计算，不以纯度折算。其三，对毒品犯罪从经济上予以制裁。对毒品犯罪，规定了并处没收财产或罚金，旨在剥夺毒品罪犯的非法收益，摧毁其再次实施毒品犯罪的经济能力。其四，对利用、教唆未成年人走私、贩卖、运输、制造毒品，或者向未成年人出售毒品的，引诱、教唆、欺骗或者强迫未成年人吸食、注射毒品的，因走私、贩卖、运输、制造、非法持有毒品罪被判过刑又有毒品罪行为的，从重处罚。其五，对走私、贩卖、运输、制造毒品等严重的毒品罪犯处以死刑。中国在立法上对毒品犯罪从严惩处，是现实禁毒斗争的需要，表明了中国严厉禁毒的立场。

　　Severely punishing drug-connected crimes is one of the outstanding characteristics of China's criminal legislation for drug control. The revised Criminal Law fully embodies this principle. First, the law comprehensively specifies the types of drug-related crimes, guaranteeing that various drug-related criminal offenses are punished by law. The law specifies 12 crimes, which cover the smuggling, trafficking, transporting and manufacturing of drugs, the illegal holding of drugs, the harboring, transferring and concealing of drugs and illicit drug-related money, the smuggling of materials for manufacturing drugs, the illegal trading in such materials, the illegal cultivation of mother plants of narcotic drugs, the illegal trading, transporting, hand-carrying and holding of seeds and seedlings of such plants, and the illegal provision of narcotics and psychotropic substances, as well as the criminal punishments for these crimes. In addition, the penalties for the laundering of drug-related money are stipulated. Second, the law specifies that the criminal responsibility of a person for smuggling, trafficking, transporting or manufacturing narcotic drugs, regardless of their quantity, be legally pursued and punished. The quantity of drugs shall be calculated according to the verified amount of the drugs smuggled, trafficked, transported, manufactured or illegally held, and not in terms of purity. Third, economic sanctions are applied against drug-related crimes. The law specifies that property shall be confiscated or a fine imposed for drug-related crimes, aiming at depriving drug criminals of their illegal income and destroying their economic ability to commit drug-related crimes again. Fourth, those who make use of or instigate minors to smuggle, sell, transport or manufacture drugs, sell drugs to minors, or lure, instigate, deceive or force them into taking or injecting drugs, and those who have again committed drug-related crimes after having already been convicted of the crime of smuggling, selling, transporting, manufacturing or illegally holding drugs shall be punished with severity. Fifth, criminals who smuggle, sell, transport or manufacture large amounts of drugs shall be sentenced to death. The fact that China legislatively punishes drug-connected crimes with severity is required by the reality of the anti-drug struggle, and shows China's stand for strict drug control.

　　严格管理、禁止滥用麻醉药品和精神药品，是中国禁毒法制建设一项十分重要的内容。中国为此颁布的法律、法规和规章多达30余项。1984年9月，第六届全国人民代表大会常务委员会第七次会议通过《中华人民共和国药品管理法》，其中第三十九条规定：国家对麻醉药品、精神药品实行特殊的管理办法。1987年和1988年，国务院先后发布《麻醉药品管理办法》和《精神药品管理办法》，分别对麻醉药品和精神药品的生产、供应、运输、使用、进出口的管理作出了明确规定。1995年，国务院发布《强制戒毒办法》，卫生部发布《戒毒药品管理办法》，使戒毒工作有法可依。

　　Strict administration to prevent the abuse of narcotics and psychotropic substances is a very important content of the building of China's anti-drug legal system. Hence China has promulgated more than 30 relevant laws, statutes and regulations. In September 1984, the seventh meeting of the Standing Committee of the Sixth NPC adopted the Law of the PRC on the Management of Medicines and Chemical Reagents. Article 39 of the Law specifies: The state adopts special procedures for the administration of narcotics and psychotropic substances. In 1987 and 1988, the State Council promulgated the Procedures for Narcotic Drug Control, and the Procedures for Psychotropic Substances Control, which specify clearly the administration of the production, supply, transportation, use, import and export of narcotics and psychotropic substances. In 1995, the State Council promulgated the Procedures for Compulsory Drug Addiction Rehabilitation, and the Ministry of Health issued the Procedures for the Administration of Pharmaceuticals for Drug Addiction Treatment. Hence the work in this regard has laws to follow.

　　为了防止易制毒化学品流入非法渠道，打击有关违法犯罪活动，中国立法机构和政府还发布了一系列严格管制易制毒化学品的法规和规章。《中华人民共和国刑法》、《中华人民共和国海关法》和全国人民代表大会常务委员会《关于禁毒的决定》，都对非法买卖、走私易制毒化学品和麻黄素等用于制造毒品的原料和配剂的犯罪行为，规定了严厉的处罚条款。

　　To prevent precursor chemicals diverting into illegal channels, and crack down on relevant illegal or criminal activities, Chinese legislative bodies and the Chinese government have also issued a series of laws and regulations for the strict control of such chemicals. The Criminal Law of the PRC, the Customs Law of the PRC, and the Decision on Drug Control made by the NPC Standing Committee include stern penalties for the criminal offenses of illegally trading and smuggling precursor chemicals, ephedrine and other raw materials and ingredients intended to be processed into drugs.

　　此外，云南、贵州、四川、广东、广西、甘肃、陕西、黑龙江、宁夏、江苏等省、自治区的地方立法机构，也从实际出发，制定了地方性禁毒法规。

　　In addition, the legislative organs of Yunnan, Guizhou, Sichuan, Guangdong, Gansu, Shaanxi, Heilongjiang and Jiangsu provinces, and the Guangxi Zhuang and Ningxia Hui autonomous regions have worked out local drug control statutes in accordance with local conditions.

　　目前，中国已初步形成了以刑事法律为主、行政法规和地方性法规相配套的禁毒法律体系，为开展禁毒斗争提供了有力的法律武器。

　　At present, China has formed a preliminary anti-drug legal system with criminal laws as the mainstay, and administrative and local statutes as supplements, thus providing powerful legal weapons for the anti-drug struggle.

坚决惩治毒品犯罪
    
　　 Cracking Down on Drug-related Crimes

　　中国禁毒执法机关严格执法，对一切毒品犯罪活动严厉打击，对一切毒品犯罪分子严惩不贷。

　　China's anti-drug law enforcement organs enforce the laws strictly and are waging a fierce battle against all drug-related criminal activities, administering merciless punishment to those involved in such activities.

　　针对毒品主要来自境外的情况，中国尽最大努力，严格查禁过境贩毒。八十年代，以西南边境及东南沿海等地区为重点，投入大量人力、物力、财力，组织公安机关、武警部队、海关和群众联防队协同作战，建立了边境一线堵、内地二线查和交通要道、机场、车站、码头三线截的“三道防线”。九十年代，进一步加大查禁过境贩毒的工作力度，“堵源截流”，在各地主要交通线及机场、车站、海港、码头公开查禁毒品，形成了统一布防、分工协作，对入境毒品围追堵截的态势。全国公安、海关、铁路、交通、民航、林业、邮电等有关部门，充分发挥各自职能，缉毒成效显著。1982年以来，仅云南省就查获过境贩毒案件7万多起，缴获从“金三角”流入的海洛因和鸦片80多吨。1994年5月，云南省警方成功破获特大跨国贩毒案，抓获“金三角”大毒枭，司法机关依法处以极刑。多年来，中国执法机关始终保持对毒品犯罪活动的高压态势，沉重打击了境内外毒品犯罪分子的嚣张气焰。

　　In China, drugs mainly come from other countries, and the Chinese government has done its best to ban transit drug trafficking. In the 1980s, the government organized public security, armed police and customs organs, and the civilian joint defense teams to coordinate the fight against drug trafficking, mainly in the southwest border areas and southeast coastal areas. It mobilized a large number of people, a great quantity of materials and a large amount of money. Three "lines of defense'' were set up to keep drugs from flowing in: The first line was the borderland, where exit and entry were subject to strict examination; the second line was composed of checkpoints in inland regions; and the third line consisted of checks on vital lines of communication, airports, railway stations and harbors. In the 1990s, the work of banning transit drug trafficking was further intensified and attention was paid to "eradicating sources of drugs and obstructing their channels of trafficking." Checking was publicly done on key lines of communication, and at airports, railway stations, sea ports and harbors, so that a situation was created in which defense was organized in a unified way and actions were coordinated with due divisions of labor and incoming drug dealers were subject to encirclement, pursuit, obstruction and interception. The functions of relevant organs such as the public security, customs, forestry, posts and telecommunications, railway, civil aviation and other transport departments have been brought into full play, culminating in a signal victory in the battle against drugs. Since 1982, more than 70,000 transit drug trafficking cases have been cleared up in Yunnan Province alone, and more than 80 tons of heroin and opium from the "Golden Triangle'' area have been confiscated. In May 1994, police in Yunnan Province cracked an extraordinarily serious transnational drug smuggling case, in which the "Golden Triangle'' drug ring kingpin was sentenced by the judicial organ to capital punishment according to law. For many years China's law enforcement organs have consistently adopted a highhanded policy in dealing with drug-related criminal activities and struck heavy blows at the overweening arrogance of the drug-related culprits both at home and abroad.

　　在严查过境贩毒的同时，中国政府持续组织禁毒专项斗争，不断对毒品危害严重地区进行重点整治，狠狠打击了国内毒品违法犯罪活动。1983年至1986年，全国连续三年开展的“严厉打击刑事犯罪活动”都把毒品犯罪作为重点。1992年8月，云南省政府组织历时83天的武装扫毒行动，一举捣毁了在云南省文山州平远镇形成的具有黑社会性质的特大贩毒贩枪集团。1993年至1996年，公安部部署在西南边境地区开展了“三年缉毒缉枪专项斗争”。1997年，国家禁毒委员会统一部署在全国开展了声势浩大的禁毒专项斗争，取得重大战果。1999年以来，在国家禁毒委员会统一组织下，云南、贵州、四川、广东、广西、甘肃等重点省区，对一些毒品危害严重地区进行了专项重点整治，破获了一批毒品大案，抓获了一批毒犯，打掉了一批贩毒团伙，摧毁了一批地下毒品交易市场和网络。1991年至1999年，中国禁毒执法机关共破获毒品违法犯罪案件80余万起，缴获海洛因39.67吨，鸦片16.894吨，大麻15.079吨，甲基苯丙胺23.375吨。

　　While stemming the trafficking of drugs from abroad, the Chinese government has continuously organized special battles against drugs, constantly focusing attention on areas where drugs constitute a serious problem and hitting hard at drug crimes at home. In the three consecutive years from 1983 to 1986, China launched a nationwide campaign to crack down on criminal offenses, targeted mainly at drug-related crimes. In August 1992, the Yunnan provincial government organized an 83-day armed drug elimination operation, in which a massive drug-and weapon-smuggling ring which had been operating in the town of Pingyuan, Wenshan Prefecture, Yunnan Province, with the characteristics of a criminal syndicate was smashed at one fell swoop. From 1993 to 1996, in the southwest border areas, the Ministry of Public Security launched a three-year campaign against drugs and firearms. In 1997, according to a unified deployment the NNCC launched a momentous anti-drug campaign nationwide, with great success. Since 1999, under the unified organization of the NNCC key areas like Yunnan, Guizhou, Sichuan, Guangdong and Gansu provinces and the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region have paid great attention to drug-infested areas and cracked a sequence of major drug-related cases, arrested a contingent of drug-traffickers, wiped out a batch of drug-smuggling gangs and eradicated a number of underground drug-dealing markets and networks. From 1991 to 1999, China's drug-control organs cracked more than 800,000 drug cases, and confiscated 39.67 tons of heroin, 16.894 tons of opium, 15.079 tons of marijuana and 23.375 tons of methamphetamine.

　　中国人口众多，对麻醉药品和精神药品合法需求量大。在保障人民健康、满足医疗需要的同时，中国对118种麻醉药品和119种精神药品实行严格的管制，限制其生产、经营、使用和进出口，防止流入非法渠道。各地卫生、药品监督管理、农业、工商行政、外贸和海关、铁路、交通、民航、公安等部门，每年都对麻醉药品和精神药品的生产、经营、运输、进出口等进行安全检查，及时查处非法生产、贩运、供应和滥用行为。黑龙江、内蒙古、山西、陕西等中国北部省区，近年来严厉查处了一大批盗窃、非法买卖、滥用哌替啶等麻醉药品的违法犯罪案件。

　　China is a country with a large population. So it needs a lot of legal narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. While endeavoring to protect people's health and meet the needs of medical treatment the government practices strict control of 118 narcotic drugs and 119 psychotropic substances, and their production, trading, use and import and export are restricted to prevent illegal circulation. The health and pharmaceuticals control and management departments, as well as the agricultural, industrial and commercial administration, foreign trade, customs, public security, railway, civil aviation and other transport departments in different areas carry out security checks every year on the production, trading, transportation, and import and export of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. The illegal production, trafficking and supply or abuse of such drugs and substances are promptly investigated and punished. A large number of criminal cases of stealing, illegal buying and selling or addiction of pethidine and other narcotic drugs have been investigated and severely dealt with in Heilongjiang, Shanxi and Shaanxi provinces and the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region in the northern part of China.

    中国政府始终把禁种毒品原植物作为工作重点，常抓不懈，防患于未然。国家禁毒委员会每年都部署全国开展禁种铲毒工作。各级政府层层落实禁种铲毒责任制，发动群众搞好宣传教育和禁种检查，做到种毒必究、有毒必铲。重点山区、林区的当地政府，每年都组织人员对山区、林区非法种植毒品原植物问题进行调查监控。1992年以来，国家禁毒委员会和林业部门运用现代科技手段，在东北的大兴安岭和西北的莲花山等原始森林地区组织了航测查毒铲毒行动。目前，中国基本禁绝了非法种植毒品原植物。
    
　　The Chinese government prohibits the cultivation of mother drug plants. It has always taken this as a focal point of its drug control work and paid constant attention to it as a way to nip troubles in the bud. Every year, the NNCC instructs governments at all levels to promote the activities to eradicate drug cultivation and to carry out a responsibility system along that line. Anti-drug publicity and education is conducted among the people and efforts are made to investigate illegal drug planting and to see that drug growers are punished and the plants are uprooted wherever they are found. The local governments in key mountainous and forested areas organize special teams every year to investigate and check the illegal planting of mother drug plants. Since 1992, the NNCC and forestry departments have organized aerial surveillance of suspected planting in the primeval forests in the Greater Hinggan Mountains in northeast China and in the Lianhua Mountains in northwest China, with modern scientific and technological methods. As a result of all this, China has virtually eradicated the illegal cultivation of mother drug plants.

严格管制易制毒化学品
    
　　 Exercising Strict Control over the Precursor Chemicals

　　八十年代以来，随着世界毒品问题的泛滥和化学合成毒品生产的扩张，跨国走私、贩运各种易制毒化学品和麻黄素活动剧增。中国政府以对国际社会高度负责的态度，认真履行有关国际禁毒公约的义务，对易制毒化学品和麻黄素实行严格的管制。

　　Since the 1980s, transnational smuggling and trafficking of precursor chemicals and of ephedrine have increased rapidly in tandem with the prevalence of the global drug problem and the extended production of chemosynthesized drugs. The Chinese government takes seriously its responsibility to the international community to strictly control these chemicals and ephedrine, in earnest compliance with its duties under international anti-drug conventions.

　　不断健全管制易制毒化学品的法规和规章。中国有关部门于1988年10月发文，对醋酸酐、乙醚、三氯甲烷三类可供制造海洛因等毒品的化学品实行出口管制。1993年1月，中国对《联合国禁止非法贩运麻醉药品和精神药物公约》所列举的22种易制毒化学品实行出口许可证管理；1996年6月，又规定对上述22种易制毒化学品实行进口许可证管理。1997年4月，中国外贸部门发布《易制毒化学品进出口管理暂行规定》，并于1999年12月正式发布《易制毒化学品进出口管理规定》。临近境外毒源地的云南、四川等省，还制定了对易制毒化学品的生产、运输、经营和使用进行全面管制的地方性法规。目前，中国政府正在制定全国性的易制毒化学品管理条例。

　　Laws and regulations on the control of such chemicals have gradually been perfected. In October 1988, the relevant government departments issued a document on the control of exports of acetic oxide, ether and chloroform, which can be used for synthesis of heroin and other narcotic drugs. In January 1993, China exercised control over the export licenses for the 22 precursor chemicals as listed in the UN Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, and in June 1996 it also exercised control over the import licenses for these chemicals. In April 1997, China's relevant foreign trade department issued the Interim Regulations on the Control of the Import and Export of Precursor Chemicals, and in December 1999, the Regulations on the Control of the Import and Export of Precursor Chemicals was officially issued. At the same time, local regulations on the overall control of the production, transportation, trading and use of such chemicals were formulated in provinces, such as Yunnan and Sichuan that border on the sourcelands of narcotic drugs. At present, the Chinese government is formulating nationwide regulations on the control of such chemicals.

　　逐步完善管制麻黄素的法规。1992年至1998年，中国有关部门多次发布关于麻黄素管理方面的规定。1998年3月，国务院发出《关于进一步加强麻黄素管理的通知》，规定对麻黄素的生产、经营、运输、使用、出口实行专项管理。1998年12月，有关部门联合下发《关于加强麻黄素类产品出口管理有关问题的通知》，对麻黄素各种盐类、粗品、衍生物和单方制剂等12个品种全部实行出口管制。1999年6月和2000年5月，国家有关部门先后发布《麻黄素管理办法》和《麻黄素运输许可证管理规定》，进一步完善了对麻黄素严格管制的有关规定。

　　Regulations on the control of ephedrine have steadily been improved. From 1992 to 1998, the relevant government departments issued several regulations on the control of ephedrine. In March 1998, the State Council issued the Notice on Further Strengthening the Control of Ephedrine. The notice stipulates that the production, trading, transportation, use and export of ephedrine shall be subject to special control. In December 1998, the relevant departments jointly issued the Notice on Issues Pertaining to the Strengthened Control of the Export of Ephedrine-typed Products, exercising control over the export of the 12 saline products, semi-finished products, derivatives and single preparations of ephedrine. In June 1999 and May 2000, they issued the Procedures for the Control of Ephedrine and the Regulations on the Control of Transportation Licenses for Ephedrine, which have further improved the rules on the strict control of ephedrine.

　　中国各级主管部门和执法机关严格执行国家有关法律法规，不断加强对易制毒化学品和麻黄素生产及流通领域的监测、管理，依法保护合法生产经营，坚决打击非法买卖、贩运和走私活动。西南、西北、东北各省区在边境地区和各出入境口岸，坚持开展既查禁毒品入境，又查禁易制毒化学品和麻黄素走私出境的“双向查缉”工作。1997年至1999年，全国共破获非法买卖和走私易制毒化学品案件548起，缴获各类易制毒化学品1000多吨。

　　The competent departments and law enforcement organs at all levels strictly implement the state's relevant laws and regulations, and continuously strengthen the supervision and control of the production and circulation of precursor chemicals and of ephedrine. The legal production and trading of these chemicals and ephedrine are protected by law, but the illegal buying and selling, trafficking and smuggling of these products shall be severely punished. The border areas and ports of entry and exit of provinces and autonomous regions in southwest, northwest and northeast China have consistently investigated and banned the import of drugs as well as the smuggling abroad of those chemicals and ephedrine in pursuance of their "two-way investigation program.'' From 1997 to 1999, China cracked 548 cases of illegal buying, selling and smuggling of precursor chemicals and confiscated more than 1,000 tons of illegal chemical products.

　　中国有关部门还与联合国禁毒机构及有关国家的主管当局，联合建立了易制毒化学品进出口的国际核查制度。仅1999年，中国就办理进出口核查568件，发现、制止了35起非法贸易，阻止了3380吨易制毒化学品出境。1999年4月至12月，在包括中国在内的20多个国家、地区及国际组织联合举行的防止高锰酸钾流入非法渠道的全球“紫色行动”中，中国发现非法贸易6起，阻止了1160吨高锰酸钾出口。

　　In collaboration with UN drug control organs and competent departments of other countries, the relevant departments of China have set up an international system to check the import and export of precursor chemicals. In 1999 alone, China examined 568 such import and export cases, and 35 cases of illicit trading were discovered and curbed. As a result, 3,380 tons of chemical products were withheld from export. From April to December 1999, China discovered six cases of such illegal trading, and withheld 1,160 tons of potassium permanganate from export, during the global drive known as "Purple Action.'' China joined with more than 20 countries, regions and international organizations, during this campaign to thwart illegal trafficking in potassium permanganate.

　　自五十年代起，中国政府一直严格管理苯丙胺类精神药品。针对近年来制造、贩卖甲基苯丙胺犯罪活动日益猖獗的情况，中国公安机关以东南沿海地区为重点，多次部署开展了打击制贩甲基苯丙胺类犯罪的专项斗争。1999年，国家禁毒委员会将禁毒工作方针中的禁吸、禁贩、禁种“三禁并举”，调整为禁吸、禁贩、禁种、禁制“四禁并举”，各地公安部门进一步加大了打击制贩甲基苯丙胺等制毒犯罪活动的力度，取得显著成效。1991年至1999年，全国共破获制贩甲基苯丙胺案件360起，沉重打击了此类犯罪活动。

　　Since the 1950s, China has exercised strict control over amphetamines and other psychotropic substances. In view of the fact that criminal activities involving the manufacture and trafficking of methamphetamines have become increasingly rampant in the past few years, Chinese public security organs have launched several campaigns specially against such activities, particularly in the southeast coastal areas of the country. In 1999, the NNCC added the prohibition of drug manufacture to its "simultaneous promotion of three prohibitions'' anti-drug principle (simultaneous prohibition of addiction, trafficking and cultivation of drugs), making it the "simultaneous promotion of four prohibitions'' principle. Public security authorities across the country have thenceforth intensified their operations against the manufacture and trafficking of methamphetamines and other drug-related crimes, and these operations have been crowned with outstanding success. From 1991 to 1999, China cracked 360 cases involving the production and trafficking of methamphetamines, dealing a heavy blow to such activities.

矫治挽救吸毒人员

　　 Treatment and Rehabilitation

　　为了保护公民身心健康，维护社会治安秩序，最终消除毒品危害，中国政府高度重视并大力开展禁吸戒毒工作，采取强制戒毒与社会帮教相结合的综合戒毒治疗康复措施，努力教育挽救吸毒人员。

　　To protect the physical and mental health of Chinese citizens, maintain public order, and wipe out once and for all the scourge of drugs, the Chinese government attaches great importance to and vigorously carries out the work of drug prohibition and the rehabilitation of addicts. To this end, it has adopted comprehensive measures for the rehabilitation of addicts, and their treatment and recovery, integrated with compulsory measures and social help and education, in a concerted effort to eradicate drug abuse and save drug addicts.

　　中国法律规定，吸毒必戒。为此，各地建立了吸毒人员调查登记制度，建立了药物滥用监测网络，定期收集数据资料，及时掌握吸毒人员情况。国务院发布了《强制戒毒办法》，有关部门制定了《阿片类成瘾常用戒毒疗法的指导原则》和《戒毒药品管理办法》，规范了全国的戒毒治疗工作。国家还建立了药物依赖性研究中心、药物滥用监测中心、药物依赖治疗中心和麻醉品实验室，组织科研机构和专家开展科学戒毒方法和戒毒药物研究。中国从国情出发，以强制戒毒为主体，采取多种办法帮助吸毒人员戒除毒瘾。对吸毒成瘾者，一律送到由各级政府统一建立的戒毒所强制戒毒；对强制戒毒后又吸毒者，一律送司法部门管理的劳动教养所，在劳动教养中强制戒毒；对不宜收入强制戒毒所的吸毒人员，在家属监护下和住地公安派出所的教育、管理下，令其限期戒毒。此外，一些地方在医疗单位开办戒毒脱瘾治疗业务，收治自愿戒毒者。一些地区还因地制宜，采取了基层组织、社会团体监督帮助吸毒人员戒毒的做法。

　　According to Chinese law, drug takers must be rehabilitated. Therefore, an investigation and registration system and monitoring networks of drug abuse have been established throughout the country, regularly collecting data and materials, and promptly monitoring the conditions of addicts. The State Council has promulgated the Procedures for Compulsory Drug Addiction Rehabilitation, and the related department has formulated the Guiding Principles for Commonly Used Therapies Applicable to Opiates Addicts and the Procedures for the Control of Pharmaceuticals for Drug Addiction Treatment, to standardize the work of the rehabilitation and treatment of addicts in China. The state has also established drug dependence research centers, drug abuse monitoring centers, drug dependence treatment centers and narcotic drugs laboratories, and organized scientific research institutions and experts to conduct research on scientific methods of rehabilitation for addicts and pharmaceuticals for drug addiction treatment. Proceeding from its concrete conditions, China has adopted various measures to rehabilitate addicts, taking compulsory measures as the main principle. All addicts are sent to compulsory rehabilitation centers established by governments at all levels. Those who resume drugs after receiving compulsory treatment, are sent to reeducation-through-labor centers administered by judicial departments, where they are forced to undergo treatment side by side with reeducation through physical labor. Addicts who are unsuitable for receiving treatment in compulsory rehabilitation centers, are ordered to give up within a definite time period under the guardianship of their family members and the education and administration of the local public security stations. Some local medical institutions also offer services for the rehabilitation and treatment of volunteer addicts. In some areas, measures adaptable to local conditions have also been taken to supervise and help addicts become rehabilitated through mass organizations and organizations at the grassroots level.

　　在中国，强制戒毒和劳教戒毒是最主要的戒毒方法，强制戒毒所和劳教戒毒所是教育挽救吸毒人员的特殊学校。《强制戒毒办法》对强制戒毒场所的建设、管理、戒毒措施、生活保障等方面作出了明确具体的规定。中国公安、司法机关分别制定了有关规章，对强制戒毒所和劳教戒毒所实行等级化、规范化管理。各级政府每年都投入大量资金，建设专门的戒毒场所。目前，全国共有强制戒毒所746个，戒毒劳教所(队)168个。1999年共强制戒毒22.4万余人次，在所劳教戒毒人员12万。各戒毒所坚持教育、感化、挽救的方针，实行依法、严格、科学、文明管理。戒毒所都对戒毒人员进行安全科学的戒毒治疗，进行法制教育、道德教育和严格的行为矫正训练。组织戒毒人员学习科学文化知识，开展丰富多彩的文体活动，参加适当的生产劳动，使其既增强体能，又掌握谋生技能。戒毒人员的劳动所得，全部用来改善其生活条件。戒毒所充分尊重和保障戒毒人员的合法权益，实行警务公开制度，主动接受人大代表和社会各界的监督。国家禁毒部门与卫生防疫部门合作，在戒毒所开展了艾滋病的监测、宣传教育和防治工作，在部分省进行了吸毒人群艾滋病感染情况调查。云南、贵州、甘肃、广东等省的一些戒毒所，在规范化管理方面创造了“治疗医院化、教育学校化、环境园林化、康复劳动化”的经验，被戒毒人员称为“告别毒品的再生之所”。

　　In China, addicts mainly receive treatment at compulsory rehabilitation centers and treatment and reeducation- through-labor centers - special schools for educating and saving addicts from ruin. Specific and concrete provisions are formulated in the Procedures for Compulsory Drug Addiction Rehabilitation on the construction, administration, rehabilitation measures and welfare provisions of compulsory rehabilitation centers. Chinese public security and judicial organs have also formulated regulations on the hierarchical and standardized administration of compulsory rehabilitation centers and treatment and reeducation-through- labor centers. Governments at all levels also earmark large amounts of funds for the establishment of special rehabilitation centers each year. At present, China has a total of 746 compulsory rehabilitation centers and 168 treatment and reeducation-through-labor centers (teams). In 1999, over 224,000 and 120,000 addicts received treatment at compulsory rehabilitation centers and treatment and reeducation-through- labor centers, respectively. The rehabilitation centers carry out strict, scientific and civilized administration according to law, adhering to the principle of saving addicts through reform education. They offer to addicts safe and scientific treatment, legal and moral education, and strict training to correct their behavior, and organize them to learn scientific and general knowledge, carry out varied and stimulating recreational and sports activities, and engage in appropriate productive labor, by which they can both improve their physical agility and master skills to earn their livings. All the income from their work is used to improve their living conditions. To fully respect and guarantee the legal rights and interests of addicts, the centers carry out an open security system and voluntarily lay their work open to the supervision of the deputies to the NPC and the general public. State narcotics control organs and health and anti-epidemic departments jointly carry out the work of survey, education, prevention and cure in connection with AIDS at the centers, and conduct investigations into HIV infection among addicts in some provinces. Endeavoring to realize standardized administration, a number of centers in Yunnan, Guizhou, Gansu and Guangdong provinces have created the experience of "undergoing treatment along hospital lines, offering education along school lines, managing the environment along garden lines and achieving rehabilitation along labor lines," and have been called "places of rebirth where I bade farewell to drugs" by many addicts.

　　为解决戒毒复吸率高的难题，中国政府依靠人民群众，动员全社会的力量，开展对戒毒人员回归社会后的继续帮教工作。各地的公安机关、社区组织、单位、家庭与戒毒所密切配合，把强制戒毒与帮教巩固有机结合起来，普遍建立了社会帮教制度，组成了各种类型的帮教小组，对戒毒人员全面落实帮教措施。全国各地的工会、共青团、妇联、个体工商业者协会等社会团体，充分利用自身优势，有针对性地对吸毒人员中的妇女、职工、青少年、个体劳动者等开展帮教工作，收到良好效果。中国各级政府和基层组织，积极帮助戒毒出所人员解决生活、工作方面的具体困难，使其在就业、升学方面不受歧视。许多戒毒人员成功戒断毒瘾，重返社会，走向新生。

　　To solve the difficult problem of the high rate of relapse, the Chinese government carries out the work of continuous help and education for rehabilitated addicts upon their return to society, relying on the masses and mobilizing all social forces. Local public security organs, community organizations, units and families closely cooperate with rehabilitation centers to establish a social help and education system and various types of help and education groups, and fully carry out the relevant measures, organically integrating compulsory rehabilitation with help, education and consolidation measures. Mass organizations, including the trade unions, the Communist Youth League (CYL) organizations, the women's federations and the associations of self-employed industrialists and businessmen, help with the work of rehabilitating addicted women, workers and staff members, young people and self-employed laborers by making full use of their own advantages, to great effect. Governments at all levels and grassroots organizations actively help the rehabilitated addicts to solve concrete problems in their life and work, so that they will not be discriminated against in employment or admission to higher education. Many addicts have returned to society and started to lead a new life upon successful rehabilitation.

　　禁吸戒毒是根本解决毒品问题的突破口。近年来，内蒙古、云南、广西、贵州等省、自治区，从开展社会帮教工作，发展到创建“无毒社区”活动，逐步探索出一条从最基层社区抓起，以禁吸戒毒为重点，带动整个禁毒工作的新路子。其基本做法是：以城乡小型社区(城市一般是街道，农村一般是乡镇)为单位，在社区政权组织统一领导下，建立覆盖整个社区的禁毒管理机制和工作责任制，把禁毒责任分解落实到社区内的各个单位和每个人，分片包干实现无毒目标，创建“无毒社区”。在此基础上，不断扩大“无毒社区”的覆盖面，积小区为大区，最终在一县、一市、一省实现无毒目标。内蒙古自治区包头市是中国开展创建“无毒社区”活动的一个典范。该市毒品问题曾经十分严重，1994年以后，全市以禁吸戒毒为突破口，开展创建“无毒社区”活动，普遍建立和落实纵向到帮教小组，横向到辖区所有基层单位的禁毒工作责任制，形成全民参与禁毒斗争的局面。目前，该市共建立帮教小组2169个，对2000多名吸毒人员全部落实了帮教措施，一年以上的戒断巩固率达到70%以上；已建成“无毒社区”1436个，占社区总数的90.2%，实现了社会面基本无毒害的目标。

　　Narcotics prohibition and the rehabilitation of addicts are breakthrough points in the effort to completely solve the drugs problem. In recent years, the Inner Mongolia and Guangxi autonomous regions and Yunnan, and Guizhou provinces have gradually probed a new way of motivating the drug control work as a whole - starting with the grassroots units (communities), and stressing drug prohibition and the rehabilitation of addicts, to establish "drug-free communities." The basic procedure is as follows: With small communities in cities (sub-districts) and the countryside (towns and townships) as the lowest units, and under the unified leadership of the organs of state power in the communities, establishing administrative and working responsibility systems of drug prohibition covering the whole community, dividing up the responsibilities and assigning a part to each unit and individual to realize the "drug-free" target and establish "drug-free communities," continuously enlarging their coverage, and finally realizing the "drug-free" target in a particular county, city or province. Baotou City in the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region is a model in this regard. The drug problem used to be very serious in the city. However, there has been a drive to pronounce communities there "drug-free" since 1994, stressing drug prohibition and the rehabilitation of addicts, and establishing the working system of dividing the responsibilities among the help and education groups and all the local grassroots units. In this way, a situation has been created where all people in Baotou are taking part in the anti-drug struggle. At present, the city has a total of 2,169 help and education groups, implementing the related measures to over 2,000 addicts, and the consolidation rate of rehabilitation over one year has reached more than 70 percent. It has also established 1,436 "drug-free communities" (90.2 percent of the total), and basically realized the "drug-free" target in the entire area.

　　实践证明，创建“无毒社区”适合中国的国情，符合全民动员、综合治理的战略要求；“无毒社区”是持久开展禁毒斗争的有效载体。1999年，国家禁毒委员会向全国推广了包头等地的先进经验，部署在全国范围内开展创建“无毒社区”活动。

　　Experience has proved that the drive to make communities drug-free conforms to the situation in China and the strategic requirements of mobilizing the entire people to treat the drug problem comprehensively. "Drug-free community" is an effective vehicle for protracted combat vs drugs. In 1999, the NNCC publicized nationwide the advanced experience of Baotou and other cities and made arrangements for activities to establish "drug-free communities" across the country.

　提高全民禁毒意识

　　 Raising the Consciousness of the Entire People Vs Drugs

　　禁毒的关键在于唤起民众。中国把提高全民禁毒意识作为一项治本之策和战略任务，在全体国民中广泛深入地开展毒品预防教育。

　　The key to drug control work is to arouse the consciousness of the general public. China regards it as a fundamental and strategic task to raise the consciousness of the whole nation concerning the fight against drugs, and carries out extensive and deep-going drug prevention education among all the people.

　　中国各级政府高度重视禁毒宣传工作，每年都制定计划，面向社会公众开展以拒绝、抵制毒品为主要内容的毒品预防教育。各地禁毒部门与宣传、文化、广播电影电视、新闻出版等部门密切合作，充分运用报刊、广播、电视等新闻媒体和各种群众喜闻乐见的形式，经常开展禁毒宣传、教育和咨询活动，普及禁毒知识和法律知识。国家禁毒办和各地禁毒办还设立了禁毒咨询服务热线电话，云南等一些省市创办了禁毒报刊，在国际互联网上开通了禁毒网页。每年“6?3”林则徐虎门销烟纪念日、“6?26”国际禁毒日期间，各地政府都统一组织规模较大的宣传活动，形成禁毒宣传高潮。鉴于吸毒是传播艾滋病的重要途径，在每年12月1日世界艾滋病日期间，卫生部门都组织开展以“拒绝毒品，防止艾滋病”为内容的宣传活动。

　　Governments at all levels attach great importance to publicizing the dangers of drugs, and formulate plans every year to carry out drug prevention education to persuade the public to turn their backs on drugs. Local drug control departments often carry out education, publicity and consultation activities concerning the dangers of narcotics and the anti-drug laws, using the news media - newspapers, radio and television programs, and by other methods appealing to the general public, closely cooperating with the departments of publicity, culture, radio, film and television, and press and publications. The NNCC Office and its local branches have also opened special telephone lines providing advice and information on drug-related issues. Yunnan and some other provinces and cities have started periodicals and opened web pages on the Internet in this regard. Every year on June 3, the commemoration date of Lin Zexu's burning of opium stocks in Humen beach, Guangdong Province in 1839, and on June 26, the International Day Against Illicit Drug Trafficking and Abuse, local governments organize large-scale activities to publicize the dangers of narcotics. As drug taking is a major channel for the spread of AIDS, during the period of the World AIDS Day on December 1 every year, public health departments organize publicity activities, with the theme "refuse drugs, and prevent AIDS."

　　1998年5月至7月，中国政府在北京举办了为期两个月的全国禁毒展览，中国国家领导人、社会各界人士和青少年学生共166万人次前往参观，反响强烈，影响深远。国家禁毒委员会还将展览内容制作成《全国禁毒展览挂图》，下发全国各地，并组织了长达半年的巡回展览，直接接受教育的观众达1.66亿多人次。全国禁毒展览的成功举办，使中国的禁毒宣传教育水平提高到一个新的阶段，对增强全民禁毒意识，推动各项禁毒工作全面开展，起到了积极作用。

　　From May to July, 1998, the Chinese government held a two-month national exhibition on drug control. A total of 1.66 million people from all walks of life, including Chinese state leaders and young students, visited it. The exhibition provoked strong repercussions, and exerted a far-reaching influence. The NNCC also turned the contents of the exhibition into a Wall Map of the National Exhibition on Drug Control for distribution throughout the country. It also organized half-year itinerant exhibitions throughout China, at which a total of over 166 million people received education directly. The success of the national exhibition on narcotics control brought China's publicity level in this regard to a new stage, and played an active role in raising the consciousness of the entire people about the drug problem, giving a boost to drug control work in an all-round way.

　　中国政府尤其重视对青少年进行毒品预防教育。1991年第七届全国人民代表大会常务委员会第二十一次会议颁布的《中华人民共和国未成年人保护法》和1999年第九届全国人民代表大会常务委员会第十次会议颁布的《中华人民共和国预防未成年人犯罪法》，都对保护青少年不受毒品危害作出规定。按照禁毒预防教育从小抓起的思路，各级政府把对中小学生的禁毒预防教育作为禁毒工作的基础工程。1997年，国家教育委员会会同国家禁毒委员会下发通知，规定把禁毒教育作为国民素质教育的组成部分，正式纳入中小学德育教育教学大纲，要求在大中小学校有针对性地开展形式多样的禁毒教育。国家禁毒委员会和国家教育委员会共同编写了适合学生阅读的禁毒系列丛书。共青团在青少年中开展了丰富多彩的禁毒宣传活动，动员组织广大青少年向毒品宣战。许多省区开展了以青少年为主要对象的毒品预防教育活动。1999年，根据国家禁毒委员会的要求，全国县以上各级禁毒部门在24223所中小学校建立了毒品预防教育联系点，直接指导学校开展禁毒教育。

　　The Chinese government attaches special importance to drug prevention education for youngsters. Special provisions aimed at protecting young people from drugs are included in the Law of the PRC on the Protection of Minors issued at the 21st meeting of the Standing Committee of the Seventh NPC in 1991, and the Law of the PRC on the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency issued at the 10th meeting of the Standing Committee of the Ninth NPC in 1999. In pursuance of the guideline of paying special attention to education on narcotics control and prevention among youngsters, governments at all levels take the education of primary and middle school students as a basic part of narcotics control work. In 1997, the State Education Commission (SEC) and the NNCC issued a notice stipulating that drug control education as an integral part of education to improve people's cultural quality should become formally part of the program of ethical education in primary and middle schools, and that anti-drug education should be carried out in diverse forms and with definite aims in view in colleges and universities and primary and middle schools. The NNCC and SEC have jointly compiled a series of anti-drug education pamphlets for students. The CYL has also developed a variety of colorful activities to publicize the dangers of narcotics among young people, and mobilize them to fight against drugs. Many provinces and autonomous regions have unfolded the drug-prevention education activities mainly for youngsters. In 1999, according to the requirements of the NNCC, drug control departments at the county level and above established communication centers of drug prevention education in 24,223 primary and middle schools to directly guide the work in schools.

　　近年来，中国各地结合开展创建“无毒社区”活动，逐步把禁毒宣传引向社区，覆盖到社会各个角落。各级政府通过加强基层政权和群众性自治组织的建设，充分发挥街道办事处、乡镇、居(村)委会在禁毒工作中的作用，结合创建“文明社区”，积极做好毒品预防教育的基础性工作。各级工会、共青团、妇联组织，结合实际工作，开展了职工禁毒教育、青少年志愿者义务禁毒宣传和“拒绝毒品进家庭”活动。各地的爱国宗教团体发扬弃恶扬善的优良传统，积极动员宗教界人士和信教群众参与禁毒斗争。各级个体劳动者协会、私营企业者协会，认真贯彻中国个体劳动者协会《关于在全国个体劳动者、私营企业经营者中广泛开展禁毒教育的通知》，加强了对8000万个体私营经济从业人员的毒品预防教育。近年来，国家禁毒委员会不断将各种禁毒宣传材料发送到全国的强制戒毒所、治安拘留所、收容教育所、看守所、劳动教养所、监狱、工读学校，加强对易染毒特殊人群的毒品预防教育。

　　In recent years, integrated with the efforts to develop "drug-free communities," drug control publicity activities have been gradually extended to communities to cover every nook and corner of society. Governments at all levels give every encouragement to sub-district offices, towns and townships, residents and villagers committees in their drug control work by strengthening the construction of organizations of political power at the grassroots level and self-governing mass organizations, and actively carry out basic work on narcotics prevention education, integrating this with the efforts to develop "civilized communities." In the meantime, trade unions, the CYL organizations and the women's federations at all levels carry out anti-drug education among workers and staff members, anti-drug publicity organized by young volunteers, and the activity known as "preventing drugs entering families." Local patriotic religious organizations actively mobilize religious believers and personages of religious circle to fight against drugs, carrying on their good tradition of shunning evil and promoting good. The associations of self-employed laborers and private enterprise operators at various levels have conscientiously carried out the recommendations in the Notice on Extensively Carrying Out Drug Prevention Education Among Self-employed Laborers and Private Enterprise Operators in China issued by the China Self-employed Laborers' Association, and strengthened drug prevention education among the 80 million employees of private enterprises. In recent years, the NNCC has sent various anti-drug publicity materials to compulsory rehabilitation centers, houses of detention, public security houses of detention, reformatories, reeducation-through-labor centers, prisons and work-study schools for juvenile delinquents throughout China to reinforce drug prevention education among the people who are most likely to fall victims to narcotics.

　　为了使毒品预防教育系统化、经常化，国家禁毒委员会统一部署，从1999年到2001年，在全国建设禁毒教育“五个一工程”：即各省、自治区、直辖市都要建立一所禁毒教育基地，各大中小学校每年都要开展一次禁毒教育活动，各地要组织一批禁毒宣传理论研究成果，创作一批禁毒文艺作品，培养一批青年禁毒志愿者。国家重点支持北京市、贵州省贵阳市、广东省东莞市等地建设一批永久性禁毒教育基地。从1998年起，中国开始出版《中国禁毒年度报告》。

　　To make drug prevention education a systematic and regular practice, the NNCC has made overall arrangements to carry out the "five-one project" of anti-drug education nationwide from 1999 to 2001: Every province, autonomous region and municipality should establish a drug control education base; every primary and middle school, college and university should carry out an anti-drug education activity each year; and every district should organize a batch of research achievements on anti-drug publicity and theory, produce a number of literary and artistic works, and train a contingent of young volunteers in this regard. The state gives full support to Beijing, Guiyang in Guizhou Province, Dongguan in Guangdong Province and some other cities in their efforts to build permanent drug control education bases. In the meantime, China has published the Yearly Report on Drug Control in China since 1998.

开展国际禁毒合作

　　 Developing International Cooperation in Drug Control

　　加强国际禁毒合作，对于推动世界范围内的禁毒斗争和从根本上解决中国的毒品问题，是十分必要的。中国在坚持和平共处五项原则的基础上，一向积极参与和推动禁毒国际合作，在世界禁毒领域发挥了重要作用。

　　It is highly necessary to strengthen international cooperation in drug control to promote the battle against narcotics worldwide and radically solve the drug problem in China. On the basis of clinging to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence [mutual respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty, mutual non- aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence], China has all along actively participated in and promoted international cooperation in drug control and played an important role in this field.

中国政府积极参与国际禁毒事务。
The Chinese government takes an active part in international affairs connected with drug control. 
1985年6月，经全国人民代表大会常务委员会批准，中国加入经1972年议定书修正的联合国《1961年麻醉品单一公约》、《1971年精神药物公约》。1989年9月，经全国人民代表大会常务委员会批准，中国加入《联合国禁止非法贩运麻醉药品和精神药物公约》，成为最早加入该公约的国家之一。从1984年起，中国多次派代表团出席联合国、国际刑警组织、世界海关组织和世界卫生组织召开的禁毒国际会议。1989年10月，中国在北京举办亚洲地区缉毒研讨会。1996年11月，中国在上海主办国际兴奋剂专家会议。1990年2月和1998年6月，中国政府代表团先后参加联合国第十七次和第二十次禁毒特别会议，向国际社会宣示了中国政府坚决禁毒的立场和政策、措施。
In June 1985, approved by the NPC Standing Committee, China acceded to the UN 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances that had been revised by the 1972 Protocol. In September 1989, China obtained the approval of the NPC Standing Committee to accede to the UN Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, becoming one of the first member countries to it. Beginning in 1984, China has sent delegations many times to attend international drug control meetings held by the United Nations, the International Criminal Police Organization, the World Customs Organization and the World Health Organization. In October 1989, China held the Asian Region Anti-Drug Seminar in Beijing and in November 1996, hosted the International Stimulant Specialists Meeting in Shanghai. The Chinese government sent delegations to take part in the 17th and 20th UN special General Assembly sessions on drug control in February 1990 and June 1998, declaring the Chinese government’s resolute anti-drug stand, policies and measures to the international community.

　　中国积极支持和促进联合国倡导的次区域禁毒合作活动。1991年5月，国家禁毒委员会在北京主办第一次中国、泰国、缅甸和联合国禁毒署高级官员会议，商讨开展次区域禁毒多边合作的设想。1992年6月，中国、缅甸和联合国禁毒署在缅甸仰光签署《中国、缅甸和联合国禁毒署三方禁毒合作项目》。1993年10月，中国、缅甸、泰国、老挝和联合国禁毒署签署《禁毒谅解备忘录》，确定在次区域禁毒合作中保持高级别接触。1995年5月，中国、越南、老挝、泰国、缅甸、柬埔寨及联合国禁毒署在北京召开第一次次区域禁毒合作部长级会议，通过《北京宣言》，并签署《次区域禁毒行动计划》。1999年，中国政府又派代表团分别出席在日本和老挝召开的次区域部长级会议，继续积极推动次区域禁毒合作。

　　China is an active supporter and promoter of cooperation in drug control in the sub-region, as initiated by the UN. In May 1991, the NNCC of China hosted the first meeting of senior officials of China, Thailand, Myanmar and the United Nations Drug Control Program (UNDCP) in Beijing, to discuss the proposal on multilateral cooperation against drug abuse in the sub-region. In June 1992, China, Myanmar and the UNDCP signed the China/Myanmar/UNDCP Joint Cooperation Project on Drug Control in Rangoon, Myanmar. In October 1993, China, Myanmar, Thailand, Laos and the UNDCP signed the Memorandum of Understanding on Narcotic Drugs Control, which stressed keeping contacts between high officials to further the cooperation in drug control in the sub-region. In May 1995, China, Vietnam, Laos, Thailand, Myanmar, Cambodia and the UNDCP convened the first minister-level meeting on cooperation in sub-region drug control in Beijing. The meeting adopted the Beijing Declaration and signed the Sub-region Drug Control Program of Action. In 1999, the Chinese government sent delegations to attend the sub-region minister-level meetings in Japan and Laos to continue to promote enthusiastic cooperation in drug control in the sub-region.

　　中国不断加强与外国的双边、多边国际禁毒合作。中国与美国从1985年开始进行禁毒合作，1987年，两国政府签署《中美禁毒合作备忘录》。1997年，中美两国首脑签署包括禁毒合作内容的《中美联合声明》，把中美禁毒合作提高到一个新水平。随后，中美两国政府互派了禁毒联络官。中国重视与俄罗斯、哈萨克斯坦、吉尔吉斯斯坦、塔吉克斯坦在禁毒领域的合作。1996年4月，中俄两国签署《关于禁止非法贩运和滥用麻醉药品及精神药物的合作协议》。1998年，中、哈、吉、俄、塔五国元首共同签署联合声明，把打击毒品犯罪和跨国犯罪作为五国合作的一条重要内容。此外，中国政府还与墨西哥、印度、巴基斯坦、哥伦比亚、塔吉克斯坦等国政府签署了双边禁毒合作协议。

　　China has constantly strengthened bilateral and multilateral cooperation in drug control with other countries. In 1985 China began to cooperate with the United States in drug control, and in 1987 the governments of the two nations signed the Sino-US Memorandum of Cooperation in Narcotic Drugs Control. In 1997, the heads of the two states signed the Sino-US Joint Statement containing contents on cooperation in drug control, which upgraded this cooperation between the two countries to a new level. Subsequently, the governments of China and the United States mutually accredited anti-drug liaison officers. Meanwhile, China attached importance to the cooperation in drug control with Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. In April 1996, China and Russia signed the Agreement on Cooperation Against Illicit Trafficking and Abuse of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. In 1998 the heads of state of China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia and Tajikistan signed a joint statement, taking cracking down drug-connected and trans- national crimes as major contents in cooperation among the five countries. In addition, the Chinese government has signed bilateral agreements on cooperation in drug control with the governments of Mexico, India, Pakistan, Colombia and Tajikistan.

　　多年来，中国与美国、加拿大、日本、法国、澳大利亚、泰国、缅甸、老挝、越南、柬埔寨等国家开展了多种形式的禁毒情报交流、培训与执法合作。从1996年起，中国还陆续与缅甸、老挝、越南、俄罗斯等国建立边境地区缉毒执法合作联络官制度。中国与美国、加拿大、日本、韩国等国家警方，通过国际禁毒情报交流和司法协助，多次联合破获贩毒案件，有效地打击了跨国毒品犯罪活动。

　　For many years, China has developed cooperation in many forms with the United States, Canada, Japan, France, Australia, Thailand, Myanmar, Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia in anti-drug information exchange, training and law enforcement. Since 1996, China has successively established a liaison officer system of anti-drug law-enforcement cooperation in border areas with Myanmar, Laos, Vietnam and Russia. Besides, the police authorities of China, the United States, Canada, Japan and the Republic of Korea have on many occasions jointly cracked cases of illicit traffic in drugs through international anti-drug information exchange and judicial cooperation, effectively deterring transnational drug-related crimes.

　　中国政府尽自己的力量，积极帮助周边国家开展禁毒工作。从1990年起，中国通过技术援助、农业支援、开发旅游资源等多种形式，主动帮助缅甸和老挝北部传统罂粟种植地区开展替代发展工作。这些工作，在一定程度上推动了该地区经济社会的发展，有助于减轻“金三角”毒品对中国和国际社会的威胁。在国际合作中，中国得到了联合国禁毒机构的大力支持和帮助。

　　The Chinese government has done its utmost to enthusiastically help bordering countries to unfold anti-drug combat. Beginning in 1990, China has actively helped the northern parts of Myanmar and Laos, where poppies were traditionally planted, to promote alternative development by means of providing technological and agricultural support and developing tourism resources. These efforts, to some degree, have promoted the economic and social development in that region, consequently helping to reduce the threatens brought to China and international community by the "Golden Triangle" drugs. At the same time, China has received energetic support and help from the UNDCP in international cooperation.

　　过去二十多年，中国禁毒工作取得显著成就，并得到国际社会的普遍赞誉。但中国政府清醒地认识到，国际毒潮对中国危害加剧的状况，不会在短期内彻底消除；毒品在中国仍处于蔓延阶段，禁毒任重道远。人类正处于千年更迭、世纪交替的重要时刻，国际社会已空前一致地意识到了禁毒的紧迫性和重要性。早日解决毒品问题，建设一个健康、文明、幸福、美好的世界，是各国人民的共同愿望。在新的世纪里，中国政府将在全国深入持久地开展禁毒斗争。毒品一日不绝，禁毒一刻不停。中国政府将一如既往地与世界各国加强合作，为彻底消除毒害、建设一个“无毒的世界”而不懈努力。

　　Over the past 20 years or so, China has made outstanding achievements in drug control and gained a shower of praise from international community. In the meantime, the Chinese government has soberly realized that the waves of the rising international drug tide is buffeting China more severely than ever and such situation could not be eliminated in the short run. The drug problem is still rampant in China and therefore the fight against drug abuse in China is a heavy task, and there is a long way ahead in this regard. At this important moment when a new millennium is dawning on mankind and the old century is giving place to the new, international community has realized more unanimously than ever the urgency and importance of drug control. It is a common wish of people of all countries to solve the drug problem as soon as possible and to build this planet into a healthy, civilized, happy and beautiful world. During the new century, the Chinese government will wage an unremitting, thoroughgoing struggle against drugs nationwide and will not stop its efforts until drugs are eradicated. The Chinese government will, as always, strengthen cooperation with other countries and make unremitting efforts to completely eliminate narcotic drugs and build a world free from the drug scourge.

注：统计数据均未包括香港特别行政区、澳门特别行政区和台湾省。
Note: The statistical data mentioned here do not include the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Macao Special Administrative Region and Taiwan Province.

中国二十一世纪人口与发展
China's Population and Development in the 21st Century

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council Of the People's Republic of China

二○○○年十二月，北京
December 2000, Beijing

目　　录
Contents

前言
Foreword

现状与前景
 Present Situation and Future Prospects

目标与原则
 Targets and Principles

行动计划
 Plan of Action

实施计划生育与生殖健康优质服务
Promoting Family Planning and Offering Quality Services for Reproductive Health

增强国民整体素质
Improving the Overall Quality of the People

保障妇女儿童权益
Safeguarding the Rights and Interests of Women and Children

优化配置劳动力资源
Optimizing the Allocation of Labor Resources

缓解和减少贫困现象
Reducing Poverty

保障老年人权益
Protecting the Rights and Interests of the Elderly

改善人居生态环境
Improving the Living Eco-environment for the People

保障措施
 Safeguard Measures

加强法制建设
Improving the Legal System

完善利益导向机制
Improving the Interest-Oriented Mechanism

加强宣传教育
Intensifying Publicity and Education

建立科技创新体系
Building Up a Framework for Scientific and Technological Innovation

加大资金投入
Increasing Capital Input

发挥非政府组织和民间社会作用
Attaching Importance to the Role of Non-Governmental and Mass Organizations

扩大国际交流与合作
Expanding International Exchanges and Cooperation

前言 
Foreword

人类发展即将进入二十一世纪，科学技术突飞猛进，世界经济秩序和经济格局急剧变化，人口与发展进一步成为国际社会广泛关注的重大问题。走人口与经济、社会、资源、环境相互协调的可持续发展道路，正成为世界各国的共同选择。 

 Mankind is about to march into the 21st century. With the rapid development of science and technology and the swift changes in the world economic order and pattern, population and development have further become an important issue, which has aroused general concern in the international community. It is becoming the common choice of all countries to seek a way to achieve the coordinated and sustainable development between the population on one hand and the economy, society, resources and environment on the other.

中国是世界上人口最多的发展中国家。
China is a developing country with the biggest population in the world. 
抽样调查，到1999年底全国总人口为12.6亿(不含香港、澳门特别行政区和台湾省)，约占世界总人口的21%。为比较准确地把握人口变化的规律和趋势，进一步控制人口增长，提高人口素质，正确制定面向二十一世纪的人口政策和社会经济发展规划，中国政府于2000年11月开展了第五次全国人口普查。一俟数据处理完毕，这次普查的结果将及时公布。 
A sample survey shows that China's population had reached 1.26 billion by the end of 1999 (excluding the population of the Hong Kong and Macao special administrative regions and Taiwan Province), accounting for about 21% of the world population. In order to more accurately grasp the general pattern and trend of population change, further control population growth, improve population quality, and properly formulate a population policy and social and economic development plan for the 21st century, the Chinese Government conducted its fifth national population census in November 2000. The result of the census will be published in time once all the data have been processed.

人口多，底子薄，人均资源相对不足，是中国的基本国情。
China has a huge population, but a weak economic foundation with relatively inadequate resources per capita. These are its basic national conditions.
中国经济社会发展中的许多矛盾和问题都与人口问题分不开，人口问题成了制约中国经济和社会发展的关键因素和首要问题。
Many contradictions and problems in China's economic and social development are closely associated with the issue of population, which has become the key factor and primary problem restricting China's economic and social development.

能否解决好人口问题，直接关系到人民生活改善、全民素质提高和中华民族兴衰，关系到世界和平与发展。 
Whether the population problem can be properly solved has a direct bearing on the improvement of the population quality and the living standards of the Chinese people, as well as the prosperity of the Chinese nation. It also bears on the world peace and development.

中国政府按照国家现代化建设战略目标的要求，从本国的实际出发，制定并实施了符合国情的人口政策，为稳定本国和世界人口，促进人类发展和进步，作出了巨大贡献。
In line with the strategic goal of the nation's modernization drive and proceeding from its actual conditions, the Chinese Government has formulated and implemented a population policy conformable to China's reality, contributing greatly to the stabilization of the nation's and the world's population and to the promotion of human development and progress. 
中国政府愿与国际社会一道，为切实解决人口与发展问题继续作出不懈的努力。
The Chinese Government is willing to continue its unremitting efforts together with the international community to practically solve the problem of population and development. 
中国政府坚信，在二十一世纪，中国的人口与发展事业必将更加辉煌，中国一定会为全人类的文明与进步作出更大的贡献！ 
The Chinese Government firmly believes that China's population and development cause will be crowned with still more splendid achievements and that China will make still greater contributions to the civilization and progress of mankind in the 21st century!

现状与前景 
 Present Situation and Future Prospects

二十世纪七十年代以来特别是改革开放以来，中国确立了控制人口增长、提高人口素质的人口政策，全面推行计划生育基本国策。国家鼓励晚婚晚育，提倡一对夫妻生育一个子女，并依照法律法规合理安排生育第二个子女。对少数民族，国家也实行计划生育。各省、自治区、直辖市结合当地实际制定了具体政策规定。 

Since the 1970s, especially since the initiation of reform and opening-up, China has formulated the population policy of controlling population growth and improving population quality and implemented the basic state policy of family planning in an all-round way. The Government encourages late marriage and late childbearing, and advocates the practice of "one child per couple" and of "having a second child with proper spacing in accordance with the law and regulations." Family planning is also advocated among the ethnic minorities. Various provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the Central Government have formulated their own policies and regulations according to local conditions.

中国政府高度重视人口与发展问题，将人口与发展问题作为国民经济和社会发展总体规划的重要组成部分列入议事日程，始终强调人口增长要与经济社会发展相适应，与资源利用和环境保护相协调。二十世纪九十年代以来，中央政府每年召开一次关于人口与发展问题的座谈会，研究分析重大问题，制定重大决策和措施。国家组织、协调有关部门和群众团体共同实施人口与计划生育方案，将计划生育与发展经济、消除贫困、保护生态环境、合理利用资源、普及文化教育、发展卫生事业、完善社会保障、提高妇女地位等紧密结合起来，努力从根本上解决中国的人口与发展问题。 

The Chinese Government pays great attention to the issue of population and development and has placed it on the agenda as an important part of its overall plan for national economic and social development. The Government consistently emphasizes that population growth should be compatible with socio- economic development and be concerted with resource utilization and environmental protection. Since the 1990s, the Central Government has held a forum on the issue of population and development once a year for the sake of discussing and analyzing major problems and adopting important decisions and measures. The Government organizes and coordinates the relevant departments and mass organizations to jointly implement the population and family planning program, and strives to integrate family planning closely with the development of the economy, the reduction of poverty, the protection of ecological environment, the rational utilization of resources, the popularization of culture and education, the advancement of public health and social security and the improvement of women's status, in order to seek a thorough solution to the problem of population and development.

经过近30年的努力，中国成功地探索了一条具有本国特色的综合治理人口问题的道路，逐步形成了适应市场经济要求的人口调控体系和计划生育工作管理体制，人口与发展取得了举世瞩目的成就，公民的生存权、发展权和经济、社会、文化权利显著改善。 
After nearly 30 years of efforts, China has successfully found its own way of comprehensively tackling the population problem. It has gradually evolved a population control system and a family planning administrative system tailored to the needs of a market economy; achieved widely known successes in the population and development program; and notably improved the citizens' rights to subsistence and development and their rights in the economic, social and cultural fields.

人口过快增长得到有效控制。人口出生率、自然增长率分别由1970年的33.43‰和25.83‰下降到1999年的15.23‰和8.77‰，总和生育率下降到更替水平以下，进入世界低生育水平国家行列。中国在经济不发达的情况下，用较短的时间实现了人口再生产类型从高出生、低死亡、高增长到低出生、低死亡、低增长的历史性转变，走完了一些发达国家数十年乃至上百年才走完的路。 

The excessive population growth has been brought under effective control. The birth rate and natural growth rate of the population decreased from 33.43‰ and 25.83‰ in 1970 to 15.23‰ and 8.77‰ in 1999, respectively. The total fertility rate of Chinese women went below the replacement level, making China one of the countries with a low fertility level in the world. When economically still underdeveloped, China has accomplished a historic change in the population reproduction type from one featuring high-birth, low-death and high-growth rates to one featuring low-birth, low-death and low-growth rates in a relatively short period of time, a change that took decades or even up to a hundred years for some of the developed countries to realize in the past.

国民经济快速发展，综合国力显著增强，人民生活水平大幅度提高。
China's national economy has developed at a high speed, with its overall national strength notably increased and the people's living standards greatly improved. 
实行计划生育以来，全国累计少出生3亿多人，为国家和社会节约了大量的抚养成本，缓解了人口过多对资源和环境的压力，促进了经济发展和人民生活水平提高。国民生产总值提前实现了比1980年翻两番的战略目标，人民生活总体上达到了小康水平。到1999年底，中国农村尚未解决温饱的贫困人口已经从70年代末的2.5亿以上减少到3400万，占农村人口的比例从33%下降为3%左右，农村贫困人口的温饱问题基本解决。 
Since the implementation of the family planning program, over 300 million births in total have been averted nationally. This has saved a great amount of payment for the upbringing of children for the state and society, alleviated the pressure of the excessive population on the resources and environment, and accelerated the development of the economy and the improvement of the people's living standards. With the strategic goal of quadrupling the gross national product (GNP) of 1980 attained ahead of schedule, the Chinese people as a whole now live a relatively comfortable life. By the end of 1999, the rural poor without adequate food and clothing had decreased from over 250 million in the late 1970s to 34 million, accounting for a drop from 33% to around 3% of the total rural population. The impoverished people in rural areas have basically enough food and clothing now.

教育、卫生等各项社会事业成绩显著。
Great achievements have been made in various social undertakings such as education and public health. 
到2000年底，全国基本实现普及九年义务教育和基本扫除青壮年文盲的目标。平均每万人中大学生人数由1978年的8.9人增加到1999年的32.8人。基本实现人人享有初级卫生保健服务。孕产妇死亡率从1990年的94.7／10万下降到1998年的56.2／10万，住院分娩率1999年达到66.8%以上。1999年，人口平均预期寿命提高到71岁，达到中等发达国家水平。 
By the end of 2000, a nine-year compulsory education has been made universal by and large, and illiteracy among young and middle-aged people has been basically eliminated. On the average, the number of college students for every 10,000 people increased from 8.9 in 1978 to 32.8 in 1999. On the whole, everybody has access to primary health care service. The maternal mortality rate plum- meted from 94.7 per 100,000 in 1990 to 56.2 per 100,000 in 1998. The hospitalized delivery rate exceeded 66.8% in 1999. The average life expectancy increased to 71 years in the same year, the same as in moderately developed countries.

妇女地位明显提高，儿童权利得到保障，老年人生活水平不断提高。
Women's status has been raised distinctly, children's rights are protected, and the living standards of senior citizens improving.
目前，全国机关干部、国有企事业单位管理人员及专业技术人员中女干部占1／3以上。1999年，女性从业人员占社会总从业人员的46.5%，高于世界34.5%的水平，当年妇女收入为男子收入的80.4%。5岁以下儿童死亡率，1998年为42‰，比1991年下降了31.8%。1999年，小学学龄儿童入学率达到99.1%，小学毕业生升学率达到94.4%。1999年全国1岁儿童计划免疫接种率，卡介苗为97.8%，脊髓灰质炎为97.4%，百白破为97.8%，麻疹疫苗为97.5%。1999年，全国有近3000万离退休人员参加了基本养老保险，国家举办的社会福利机构达1000多个，集体举办的敬老院近4万个。 
Currently, women amount to over one-third of all government functionaries, managerial personnel in state-owned enterprises and institutions and professionals of all trades. In 1999, employed women amounted to 46.5% of the entire workforce in China, compared to the world level of 34.5%, and women's income accounted for 80.4% of men's. The mortality of children under five was 42‰ in 1998, a decrease by 31.8% from that of 1991. In 1999, the enrollment rate of primary school-age children reached 99.1% and the rate of primary school graduates entering middle schools reached 94.4%. Also in 1999, the planned percentage of the one-year-old children inoculated with the BCG vaccine was 97.8%, the polio vaccine 97.4%, the DPT vaccine 97.8%, and the measles vaccine 97.5%. In the same year, nearly 30 million retirees throughout the country were covered in the basic retirement insurance scheme, and there were some 1,000 state-run social welfare institutions and around 40,000 collective-run old folk's homes.

全社会对人口问题的认识不断深化。
The general public has gained a better understanding of the issue of population. 
人们对人口问题已形成以下共识：控制人口增长，有利于实现人口与经济、社会、资源、环境的协调发展和可持续发展；应节制生育，不应放任自流；解决人口问题不仅应关注数量，还应强调提高素质和生殖健康水平、提高人类生活质量和福利，实现人的全面发展；人口问题本质上是发展问题，只有通过经济、社会、文化等全面发展，才能最终获得解决。同时，人们的婚育、养老观念也发生了深刻变化。传统的早婚早育、多子多福和重男轻女等观念逐渐被晚婚晚育、少生优生、生男生女都一样等科学、文明、进步的观念所取代，越来越多的人自觉实行计划生育。育龄妇女平均初婚年龄从1970年的20.8岁提高到1998年的23.57岁，已婚育龄妇女综合避孕率达到83%。平均家庭规模从1971年的4.84人减少到1998年的3.63人。 
It is commonly agreed that the slow-down of population growth is beneficial to the coordinated and sustainable development between the population on one hand and the economy, society, resources and environment on the other; that it is necessary to practice birth control and not to let things slide; that while slowing down population growth, efforts should be made to improve the population quality, reproductive health, quality of life and wellbeing in general so as to realize an all-round human development; that the issue of population is essentially a problem of development and can only be solved ultimately through economic, social and cultural development. Meanwhile, people's attitude toward marriage, childbearing and the elderly support has undergone profound changes. The traditional concepts of "early marriage, early childbirth," "more sons, greater happiness" and "men are superior to women" have been gradually replaced by the scientific and progressive modern concepts of "late marriage and late childbearing," "fewer but healthier babies" and "viewing boys and girls in the same light." More and more people have voluntarily practiced family planning. The first marriage age for women of childbearing age averaged 23.57 years in 1998, as against 20.8 years in 1970. The contraceptive prevalence rate of married women of childbearing age reached 83%, and the average family size decreased from 4.84 members in 1971 to 3.63 members in 1998.

人口与发展领域的国际合作与交流不断扩大。中国充分认识解决本国人口与发展问题对稳定全球人口问题、促进世界和平与发展的重大意义，并结合本国实际贯彻历次国际人口会议确定的基本原则和精神。1994年国际人口与发展大会后，中国政府采取了一系列措施，积极实施《国际人口与发展会议行动纲领》。近年来，中国和联合国人口基金、世界卫生组织、国际计划生育联合会等国际机构以及有关国家的政府和民间组织在生殖保健、青少年教育、紧急避孕、男性参与计划生育等方面进行了卓有成效的合作。中国人口与计划生育方案的成功实施，为其他许多国家提供了有益的借鉴，并越来越为国际社会所认同。 

　International cooperation and exchanges in the area of population and development are constantly expanding. China is fully aware that the solution of her own population and development problem is of paramount importance to stabilizing the global population and promoting world peace and development. In the light of its own specific conditions, China has followed the basic principles laid down at all previous international population conferences and actively carried out their relevant resolutions. Since the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD), the Chinese Government has adopted a series of measures actively to carry out the ICPD Program of Action. In recent years, China has worked in effective cooperation with the international institutions like the UN Fund for Population Activities, World Health Organization and International Planned Parenthood Federation, and also governmental and non-governmental organizations of related countries in areas such as reproductive health, adolescent education, emergency contraception, and men's participation in family planning. The successful implementation of China's population and family planning program has provided useful experience and lessons for many other countries and has increasingly been acknowledged by the international community.

未来几十年，中国人口与发展将进入新的历史时期。在稳定低生育水平的前提下，中国人口将由低增长逐步过渡到零增长，人口总量达到峰值后开始缓慢下降。抓住出生人口减少、社会总抚养比下降、劳动力资源丰富的历史机遇，大力发展教育和科技，扩大社会投入，提高积累水平，将为加快经济发展，增强综合国力，实现人口与经济、社会、资源、环境的协调发展和可持续发展奠定坚实的基础。同时，社会主义市场经济体制的建立和完善，以及国民经济的持续快速健康发展，也将为解决人口与发展问题提供较雄厚的物质基础。 

In the coming decades, China's population and development program will enter a new historical period. On the premise of stabilizing a low fertility level, China will achieve a gradual transition from a low population growth rate to zero growth, and the total population, after reaching its peak figure, will slowly decrease. In the advantageous historical period with a decreasing birth rate and a declining total social dependency ratio and rich labor resource, it is essential to vigorously develop education, science and technology, expand social input, and raise the accumulation level. In this way, China will lay a solid foundation for speeding up economic development, increasing its overall national strength, and realizing the coordinated and sustainable development between the population and the economy, society, resources and environment. Meanwhile, with the establishment and improvement of a socialist market economic system and a sustained, fast and healthy development of the national economy, there will be a fairly strong material base for solving the problem of population and development.

中国政府清醒地认识到，中国人口与发展的矛盾依然尖锐，面临诸多困难和挑战：人口数量将在较长时期内继续增长，预计未来十几年每年平均净增1000万人以上，给经济、社会、资源、环境和可持续发展带来巨大压力；人口总体素质较低的状况在短时期内难以根本改观，与科学技术迅猛发展的要求不相适应；劳动年龄人口大量增加，就业压力居高不下；在经济尚不发达情况下进入老龄社会，给建立完备的社会保障体系增加了难度；地区间经济和社会发展不平衡现象将长期存在，消除贫困的任务依然艰巨；流动人口增加、农村人口进入城镇以及人口在不同地域间的重新分布，对传统的经济社会管理体制及相关人口政策产生重大影响；在完善社会主义市场经济体制的过程中，各种矛盾和问题将进一步显现，人口与发展问题面临的复杂性依然存在。 

The Chinese Government soberly understands that the contradiction between population and development in China has remained sharp, and that there still exist many difficulties and challenges: the population growth will continue for a prolonged period of time, with an estimated annual net increase of over 10 million in the next decade or so, which will exert great pressure on the economy, society, resources, environment and the sustainable development as a whole; it is difficult to change entirely the relatively low level of the overall population quality in a short time, which is incompatible with the rapid development of science and technology; the sharp increase of the active labor force has placed great pressure upon the job market; the arrival of an ageing society with still a quite undeveloped economy has made it more difficult to establish a comprehensive social security system; with the unbalanced economic and social development among regions continuing to exist for a long time to come, it remains an arduous task to eradicate poverty; the increase of floating population, the entry of farmers into towns and cities, and the redistribution of the population in different areas will exert an impact on the traditional economic and social management system as well as the relevant population policies; in the process of improving the socialist market economic system, various contradictions and problems will further emerge, and the complexity of the population and development issue will remain the same.
 
目标与原则 
 Targets and Principles

中国解决人口与发展问题的基本出发点是：坚持立足于人口多、人均资源少、经济和科技水平都比较落后的基本国情，借鉴世界各国的管理经验和科学成果，结合中国实际解决人口与发展中不断出现的问题，走有中国特色的人口与发展道路；坚持可持续发展的战略方针，在发展中解决人口问题，使人口与经济、社会、资源、环境协调发展，实现国家现代化和人的全面发展；坚持以充分实现人权为基本目标，将人权的普遍性原则与本国国情相结合，将生存权、发展权放在首位，努力提高人民享受公民、政治、经济、社会、文化等各项基本权利和自由的水平。尊重人民的不同文化背景、宗教习俗和道德观念，在充分考虑发展的优先事项和条件、权利和义务统一的基础上，制定和实施人口与发展的规划和政策，促进全体社会成员享有平等的发展机会。 
China's basic considerations for tackling the population and development issue: Taking into consideration its basic national conditions, including a big population, inadequate per-capita resources and a low level of economic and sci-tech development, China will persistently follow its own path in tackling the issue of population and development. It will draw on other countries' managerial expertise and scientific achievements and resolve the problems constantly arising in the course of tackling its population and development issue, in accordance with its own specific conditions. China will persistently follow its sustainable development strategy, solve the population problem in the process of development, and bring about a coordinated development between the population and the economy, society, resources and environment so as to realize national modernization and the all-round development of the people. With full realization of human rights as the basic objective, China will combine the universal principle of human rights with its national conditions, give top priority to the rights to subsistence and development, and facilitate the people's enjoyment of a higher standard of basic rights and freedom in civil, political, economic, social and cultural areas. China respects the different cultural backgrounds, religious customs and moral concepts of the people. Taking into full consideration the unity between priorities and conditions, rights and obligations, China will formulate and implement population and development plans and policies to ensure that all social members enjoy an equal opportunity for development.

中国人口与发展的目标是： 

China's targets for the national population and development program:

到2005年，全国人口总数控制在13.3亿以内(不含香港、澳门特别行政区和台湾省)，人口年平均自然增长率不超过9‰。全面推行医疗卫生和生殖健康服务，开展避孕措施的知情选择，孕产妇死亡率降低到42／10万左右，婴儿死亡率降低到31‰左右。巩固和提高九年义务教育成果，重点加强贫困地区和少数民族地区普及九年义务教育工作，城市和有条件的农村地区基本满足高中阶段教育的社会需求，初中毛入学率达到90%以上，高等教育毛入学率进一步提高。在城镇和有条件的农村地区初步建立社会保障制度。 

 By 2005, China is to have its population within 1.33 billion (excluding the population of the Hong Kong and Macao special administrative regions and Taiwan Province). The average annual rate of its natural population growth should not exceed 9‰. Comprehensive medical and reproductive health services are to be offered and informed choice of contraceptive measures practiced, so as to reduce the maternal mortality rate to about 42 per 100,000 and the infant mortality rate to about 31‰. China will consolidate and improve its achievements made in the nine-year compulsory education. Priorities will be given to popularizing the nine-year compulsory education in poverty-stricken areas and areas inhabited by ethnic minorities. Social needs for senior middle school education in cities and some rural regions with favorable conditions will be basically met, with junior middle school gross enrollment rate reaching over 90% and higher education gross enrollment rate further increased. Social security system is to be basically established in urban areas and some rural areas with favorable conditions.

2010年，全国人口总数控制在14亿以内，人民生活更加宽裕。人口素质明显提高，全国人口受教育年限达到发展中国家先进水平，群众享有基本的医疗保健和生殖健康服务，普遍实行避孕措施的知情选择，出生性别比趋于正常。努力解决人口老龄化带来的问题，初步建立覆盖全社会的社会保障制度。 

 By 2010, China is to have its population within 1.4 billion and the Chinese people will lead a much better life with an obvious improvement of its population quality. The period of time for the people to receive education will be among the longest in developing countries. The people will have access to basic medicare and reproductive health services. Informed choice of contraceptive measures is to be practiced widely and the sex ratio at birth is expected to become normal. China will redouble its efforts to solve the problems consequent upon the ageing of the population. A nationwide social security system will be basically in place.

到二十一世纪中叶，全国人口总量在达到峰值(接近16亿)后缓慢下降。人口素质和健康水平全面提高，高中阶段教育和高等教育大众化。建立起完整高效的社会保障制度。人口分布和就业结构比较合理，人口城市化水平大幅度提高。人民生活富裕，人均收入达到中等发达国家水平，社会文明程度显著提高，基本实现人口与经济、社会、资源、环境协调发展和国家现代化。 

By the mid-21st century, the total population will gradually decrease after reaching its peak number of nearly 1.6 billion. The population quality and health level will witness an overall improvement, with senior middle school education and higher education popularized nationwide. A comprehensive, highly efficient social security system will be in place. There will be a more rational population distribution and employment structure. Population urbanization will be greatly enhanced. The Chinese people will live a much better life with their per-capita income equaling that of moderately developed nations. With a much higher level of its social culture, China will have basically realized its modernization and the coordinated development between the population and the economy, society, resources and environment.

中国解决人口与发展问题所遵循的基本原则是： 
China's basic principles for solving the population and development issue:

人口与发展综合决策。加快经济和社会发展，高度重视科技和教育，努力提高人民生活水平和国民素质，把解决人口问题纳入国民经济和社会发展总体规划，制定完善各项配套政策，促进人口与经济、社会、资源、环境协调发展。稳定和完善现行生育政策。 

Population and development should be tackled in a unified way. When speeding up the economic and social development, with priorities given to science, technology and education, China is to further improve the people's living standards and their general quality. The issue of population should be included in the overall plan for social and economic development. Various supportive policies should be formulated or improved to promote the coordinated development between the population and the economy, society, resources and environment. The existing family planning policy should be upheld and improved.

综合治理人口问题。建立和完善与社会主义市场经济体制相适应的人口与计划生育工作调控体系和管理机制，采取法律、教育、经济、行政等措施综合治理人口问题。 

The population issue is to be tackled in a comprehensive way. The control and management systems for the population and family planning program should be established or improved in line with the socialist market economic system, with legal, educational, economic and administrative measures combined in tackling the population problem.

国家指导与群众自愿相结合。国家制定政策并提供必要的保障措施，兼顾国家利益和个人利益、长远利益和短期利益、整体利益和局部利益，实行行政管理与群众工作相结合，提高群众参与的自觉性。 

Government guidance is to be integrated with the people's wishes. When adopting policies and offering the necessary safeguards, the Government needs to give due consideration to both the state and individual interests, the long-term and short-term interests, the overall and local interests. Administrative measures should be integrated with mass work so as to promote the voluntary participation of the masses.

整体推进与分类指导。以农村和经济欠发达地区为重点，制定优先原则，发挥城市和发达地区的示范作用，推动不同地区的深入发展。 

Nationwide promotion should be combined with specific guidance for different localities. Rural and economically underdeveloped areas should be given priorities, while the exemplary role of cities and developed regions should be given full play in further boosting the development of different regions.

以人的全面发展为中心。尊重人民群众的主人翁地位，维护其合法权益。把实行计划生育与发展经济、帮助群众勤劳致富、建设文明幸福家庭相结合，努力为群众提供优质服务。 

The all-round development of the people should be taken as the focal point. People's status as masters of the society must be respected and their legal rights protected. It is necessary to integrate the family planning program with the efforts to develop the economy, to help the people become well-off through hard work, and to build happy and progressive families. Meanwhile, it is also necessary to offer quality service to the people.
 

行动计划 
 Plan of Action
实施计划生育与生殖健康优质服务 
Promoting Family Planning and Offering Quality Services for Reproductive Health

稳定低生育水平。稳定现行的计划生育政策，坚持既定的、行之有效的人口与计划生育工作方针，建立适应社会主义市场经济体制的调控体系和管理机制。加强基层基础工作，积极创造条件，把人口与计划生育工作纳入社区基层组织管理体制和综合服务体系。坚持因地制宜，分类指导，重点做好农村特别是中西部农村的计划生育工作，实现不同地区工作的均衡发展。改革和完善人口与计划生育工作目标管理责任制，促进计划生育工作思路和工作方式的转变。 

Keeping a low fertility level. It is necessary to continue the present family planning policy and persist in the existing effective working principles for the population and family planning program. A population control and management system conformable to the socialist market economic system should be established. The grass-roots work should be strengthened and favorable conditions actively created so that the population and family planning program can be integrated with the community management system and the comprehensive service network. The principle of proceeding in light of local conditions and offering specific guidance for different localities should be upheld. Priorities should be given to the family planning program in the rural areas, especially rural areas in the central and western regions, so that a balanced regional development can be realized. It is also necessary to reform and improve the target-oriented responsibility system for the population and family planning program, so that the way of thinking and the working style with regard to the family planning program can be improved.

大力推进优质服务。坚持以宣传教育为主、避孕为主、经常性工作为主，普及科学知识，为群众提供生产、生活、生育的优质服务，最大程度地满足群众计划生育和生殖健康需求，促进人的全面发展。 

Promoting quality services. Emphasis should be put on publicity and education, contraception and regular services. It is necessary to disseminate scientific knowledge and offer quality services to people in production, daily life and childbirth, so as to meet their needs in family planning and reproductive health to the maximum and promote their all-round development.

发展生殖健康及其相关产业。提高生殖健康产品质量及科技含量，加速科技成果转化。加强生殖健康工程技术研究开发和产业基地建设。推广新技术和新产品，优化产品结构。加强市场管理，规范市场行为。 

Expanding reproductive health and related industries. The quality of the products for reproductive health and their sci-tech content should be improved, the transformation of sci-tech achievements speeded up, and the R & D on reproductive health-related engineering technology and the establishment of related industrial bases strengthened. New technology and products should be introduced and the product mix optimized. Market management should be intensified and market behavior standardized.

增强国民整体素质 
　Improving the Overall Quality of the People

提高出生人口素质。发展妇幼卫生事业，提高妇女儿童健康水平。普及优生优育知识，开展婚前医学检查、产前诊断、遗传咨询、新生儿疾病筛查和儿童疾病综合管理等预防性技术服务。加强孕产期保健，提倡住院分娩和母乳喂养。提高妇幼保健水平，减少产伤，降低出生缺陷发生率。 

Improving the quality of newborn babies. It is essential to improve the health of women and children by promoting the maternal and child health care. Knowledge on good birth and good rearing should be publicized, to be supported by premarital medical check-up, antenatal diagnosis, genetic counseling, prevention and treatment of newborn babies' diseases, and other preventive technical services. Pregnant and prenatal care should be improved, and hospitalized delivery and breast-feeding encouraged. In this way, the maternity and child health care can be improved with birth defects and childbearing injuries reduced.

提高人口健康素质。以农村初级卫生保健为重点，加强农村卫生服务网络建设，发展和完善农村卫生综合服务体系，建立健全多种形式的农村初级医疗保障制度。深入开展农民健康教育活动，提高农民健康意识和自我保健能力。广泛开展全民健身运动，增强人民体质和健康水平。改善人居环境，开展心理咨询服务，促进人们的生理、心理健康。加强青春期、孕产期、更年期、老年期健康服务，提高人们的生活水平和质量。积极预防和控制艾滋病和其他性传播疾病。 

Improving the health of the people. It is necessary, with the emphasis on the primary health care in rural areas as the focal point, to strengthen construction of the rural health service networks, expand and improve the comprehensive rural health service system and set up and improve a rural primary medical security system of diverse forms. It is also necessary to conduct health education among farmers, with a view to improving their sense of health and the ability of self-health care. Physical exercises should be widely promoted for the sake of the people's health. Efforts should be made to improve the people's living environment and conduct psychological consultations so as to improve their physiological and psychological health. Health services should be enhanced in the periods of adolescence, pregnancy, maternity, menopause and old age so that people's living standards and quality of life are improved. Strenuous efforts should be made to check the spreading of AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases.

提高科学文化素质。发展基础教育、职业教育、成人教育和老年教育，降低文盲率。保障未成年人、妇女、少数民族、残疾人和贫困人口等特殊人群的教育权利。深化教育改革，着力推进素质教育，重视培养人的创新意识和实践能力，提高人才培养质量。继续普及九年义务教育和扫除青壮年文盲，扩大高中阶段教育和高等教育规模。完善继续教育制度，逐步建立终身教育体系。 

Raising the people's scientific and educational levels. It is essential to develop elementary education, vocational education, adult education and education for the aged. The rate of illiteracy should be further reduced. The right to education of the minors, women, ethnic minorities, the handicapped, the poverty-stricken, and people of other special groups should be protected. The reform of education should be further carried out along with the promotion of quality-oriented education, thus improving the people's sense of creation and the ability to deal with actual things and enhancing the quality of talents training. The nine-year compulsory education and anti-illiteracy campaign among the young and middle-aged should be continued and the scope of senior middle school education and higher education expanded. The system of continuing education should also be improved so that a life-long educational system can be gradually established.

提高思想道德素质。增强人们的法律意识和法制观念。移风易俗，扫除陈规陋习和愚昧落后观念，形成健康向上的价值观念、道德规范、文化舆论和社会风尚。关注青少年健康发展，开展丰富多采的文化教育活动，增强青少年道德修养，注重防止青少年危险行为的发生。 

Raising the people's ideological and moral standards. It is necessary to enhance the people's sense of law and legal concept. Established social traditions should be transformed, and outmoded conventions and practices as well as ignorant and backward concepts thrown overboard. At the same time, healthy values, moral standards, public opinions on culture and social practices are to be encouraged. Great importance should be attached to the healthy development of youngsters by providing them with colorful and meaningful cultural and educational activities. Moral education for teenagers should be strengthened and attention paid to prevent them from committing dangerous acts.

保障妇女儿童权益 
Safeguarding the Rights and Interests of Women and Children

保障妇女劳动权益。保障妇女与男子平等的生产经营权利，提高妇女经济地位。拓宽妇女就业领域，增加妇女就业机会，提高妇女就业质量。保障妇女在工资报酬、休息休假、劳动条件及社会保险等方面的劳动权益，做好女工特殊劳动保护工作。 

Safeguarding women's right to work. They should enjoy equal rights with men in business management and operation. Women's economic status should be enhanced, and their fields of employment expanded so that they can enjoy more job opportunities and a higher quality of employment. Women's labor rights and interests in wage and remuneration, rest and vacation, working conditions, social security and other aspects should be protected, as should special labor protection for women workers.

保障妇女政治、社会、文化权利。消除性别歧视，实现男女平等，优化妇女发展环境。保障妇女参与社会政治事务的权利和受教育的机会，鼓励妇女自尊、自信、自立、自强，为妇女参与管理和决策创造条件。倡导平等、文明、和睦的新型家庭关系，减轻职业妇女的家务负担。保护未成年人、老年人及残疾妇女的特殊利益，打击暴力侵害、拐骗、买卖妇女和卖淫嫖娼等违法犯罪行为，确保妇女的人身权利和财产权利。 

Safeguarding the political, social and cultural rights of women. Efforts should be made to realize the equality between men and women and optimize the environment for women's development by eliminating discrimination against women; safeguard women's rights to participate in social and political affairs and to receive education; encourage women to foster a sense of self-respect, self-confidence, self-reliance and self- improvement, so as to create conditions for their participation in management and decision-making; promote a new type of family relations featuring equality, progressiveness and harmony, and reduce the burden of housework on women. Efforts should also be made to protect the special interests of the adolescents, the elderly and disabled women, crack down on illegal activities such as violent assaults, abducting and trafficking of women, prostitution and whoring, and ensure the personal safety and property rights of women.

依法保障妇女生育权利。增强妇女的健康保健意识，引导妇女转变婚育观念，依法保护妇女婚姻家庭权益、生育权利及经期、孕期、产期、哺乳期的权益。加强男性履行计划生育和抚育子女责任的宣传教育，提高妇女的家庭决策权。定期开展妇女健康检查和妇科疾病的防治，保障妇女在整个生命周期享有必要的健康服务。通过多种资金渠道，解决妇女避孕、节育、生育的费用，保障妇女生育期间享有必要的医疗保健和获得合理的经济补助。禁止歧视、虐待生育女婴和不育的妇女。 

Safeguarding women's right to childbearing in accordance with the law. Efforts should be made to enhance women's understanding of health care and guide their ideas on marriage and childbearing; safeguard women's rights and interests in marriage, family and childbearing and the rights and interests during the period of menses, pregnancy, maternity and breastfeeding, in accordance with the law; strengthen the publicity and education of men's responsibilities in carrying out family planning and raising children and improve women's right of decision making in the family; hold health check-ups and conduct prevention and treatment of gynecological diseases among women on a regular basis, and ensure the necessary health care service for women throughout all stages of their life. Meanwhile, efforts should be made to cover the cost of contraception, birth control, and childbearing through various capital channels; and ensure essential health care and reasonable subsidy for women in their childbearing period. Any discrimination and maltreatment against women giving birth to female babies or women of infertility are forbidden.

帮助贫困妇女脱贫解困。有针对性地开展科技文化培训和扶贫项目，帮助妇女掌握生产、劳动技能，提高脱贫致富的能力。做好城乡无法定扶养义务人、无劳动能力、无生活来源的孤残女童、孤老妇女的供养工作。 

Helping impoverished women to shake off poverty. Sci-tech and cultural training and poverty-reduction projects should be carried out for women to help them master production skills and improve their ability to wipe out poverty and get rich. Care should be taken of the orphaned or disabled girls and single elderly women with no legal guardian and no working ability and means to make a living both in urban and rural areas.

保障少年儿童权益。保护儿童的生存权、发展权、受保护权和参与权。优化少年儿童成长环境。培养少年儿童在德、智、体、美方面全面发展。动员全社会关心和帮助女童、残疾儿童、离异家庭儿童、特困儿童、流浪儿童，禁止溺婴、弃婴，严厉惩治虐待、残害、拐卖少年儿童的违法犯罪行为。 

Safeguarding the rights and interests of children. Efforts should be made to safeguard children's rights to subsistence, development, protection, and participation; optimize children's living environment; foster children's all-round development- moral, intellectual and aesthetic. The whole society should be mobilized to help girls, handicapped children, children in single-parent families and in extreme poverty, and vagrant children. Any action of drowning and discarding baby girls or boys is forbidden, and such crimes as mistreatment and trafficking of children shall be severely punished.

优化配置劳动力资源 
Optimizing the Allocation of Labor Resources

积极稳妥地推进城镇化。加强城镇基础设施和服务设施建设，提高城市建设和发展的质量，优化城镇产业结构。着重发展小城镇，积极发展中小城市，完善区域性中心城市功能，发挥大城市的辐射带动作用。城乡统一规划，合理布局小城镇和农村居民点，发挥农村地域性经济、文化中心的作用，引导城镇化集约发展，完善大中小城市和小城镇协调发展的全国城镇体系。 

Pressing ahead with urbanization energetically and steadily. Efforts should be made to strengthen the construction of urban infrastructure and service facilities, enhance the quality of urban construction and development, and optimize urban industrial structure. Active efforts should be made to develop small and medium-sized cities with the emphasis on the former, improve the functions of regional central cities, and enable large cities to serve as a radiator and locomotive. A unified plan should be mapped out for small towns, cities and villages to be reasonably distributed. Regional economic and cultural centers in rural areas will be exploited to guide the intensive development of urbanization and improve the nationwide urban system with a coordinated development of small towns and large, medium and small cities.

促进人口有序迁移和流动。建立统一、开放、竞争、有序的劳动力市场，改革城镇户籍管理制度，逐步调整大中城市户口迁移政策，保障公民正常迁移和择业权利，促进人口在城乡、区域间合理流动和分布，合理配置人力资源。改革管理体制，以属地化管理为主，形成有效的管理和服务网络，为流动人口提供多方面服务。 

Promoting orderly population migration and flow. Efforts should be made to set up a unified, open, competitive, and orderly labor market; reform the urban domicile control system, and gradually readjust the policy concerning change in residency in large and medium-sized cities, so that the normal rights of citizens to move and choose jobs can be guaranteed, the rational population flow and distribution between cities and countryside and among various regions can be promoted and the allocation of human resources rationalized. Efforts should also be made to provide various services for migrant people by reforming the management system and setting up efficient management and service network based on where the migrant people live and work.

努力增加就业机会。改革劳动就业制度，拓宽城乡就业渠道，改善就业结构。进一步发展劳动密集型产业，积极发展集体企业和个体私营企业，以提供更多的就业岗位。建立阶段性就业制度，推行灵活的就业形式。发展劳动力市场，完善就业服务体系，加强职业培训，形成以市场为导向的就业机制。在城镇建立覆盖所有劳动者的社会保障制度，形成有利于劳动者自身发展的社会环境。 

Increasing employment opportunities. Efforts should be made to reform the labor employment system, expand employment channels in both urban and rural areas and improve the employment structure; further develop labor-intensive industries and actively develop collective and private enterprises so as to provide more jobs; set up an employment system of the current stage, and promote flexible and varied forms of employment; expand the labor market, improve the employment service system, strengthen job training, and set up a market-oriented employment system. Efforts should also be made to set up a social security system that will cover all the urban workers and develop a favorable social environment conducive to their self-development.

缓解和减少贫困现象 
Reducing Poverty

实施西部大开发战略。坚持发展经济和控制人口两手抓，把控制人口增长，提高人口素质，合理分布人口，开发人力资源，纳入西部大开发战略的总体规划。实施东部支持西部，城市支援农村，先进地区帮助后进地区的对口援助措施。根据不同时期、不同地区的贫困原因，制定适当的扶贫政策，使扶贫工作由解决贫困人口的温饱转向提高贫困地区的经济社会发展水平。实行倾斜发展政策，加大扶贫投入，通过财政转移支付、项目投资、发展科技教育、改善生态环境和劳务输出等多种途径，促进贫困地区经济和社会的发展，逐步增强贫困地区自我发展能力。 

Implementing the strategy for the large-scale development of the western regions. Economic development and population control should be grasped at the same time, and the control of population growth, the enhancement of population quality, the equitable distribution of population, and the development of human resources incorporated into the overall plan for the western development strategy. Measures should be taken for the east to help the west, for cities to help the countryside, and for developed regions to help the underdeveloped regions. Appropriate policies of helping the poverty-stricken people should be made in accordance with the causes of poverty in different times and regions. The goal should be switched from relieving the poverty-stricken people of their lack of food and clothing to helping poverty-stricken areas improve their level of social and economic development. A special policy should be implemented to promote the socio-economic development of the poor areas and help them gradually improve their capability for self-development through increased poverty-relief input, financial transfer and payment, project investment, promotion of science, technology and education, improvement of the ecological environment, and export of labor.

减少农村贫困人口。坚持开发式扶贫方针，加大农村扶贫攻坚力度，采取经济、科技、教育和计划生育等多种手段，改变并扭转贫困人口的传统观念和生产、生活方式，鼓励少生快富。以最低收入人口作为扶贫开发的基本对象和主要目标，重点扶持低收入贫困人口相对集中的地区，改善生产生活条件。增加农业开发科技含量，拓宽市场，生产市场需要的产品。普及教育，提高卫生保健水平和人口素质，增强自我发展能力。有条件的地方，逐步建立社会保障制度，降低返贫率。 

Reducing the population living under the poverty line in the countryside. Efforts should be made to persevere in the principle of development-oriented poverty reduction, strengthen the work of helping the rural poor, and change their conventional ideas and ways of production and life, and encourage them to have fewer births and become well-off early by developing economy, science and technology, education, and family planning. The poverty alleviation program should focus on helping people with the lowest income and regions with a relatively large concentration of the low-income poor by improving conditions for living and production, increasing the role of science and technology in agricultural development, expanding the market, and producing market-oriented products. Efforts should be made to popularize education, improve the level of medicare and the general quality of the people, and strengthen the ability of personal development. The social security system should be set up gradually in regions with good conditions so as to reduce the rate of falling back into poverty again.

防止城市人口贫困。逐步建立健全城市扶贫机制，实施再就业工程，广泛开辟就业门路。完善基本养老保险、基本医疗保险、失业保险、城市居民最低生活保障制度，普遍建立职工工伤保险和生育保险制度，分散职业风险。开展职业康复工作，帮助伤残职工恢复劳动能力。鼓励群众互助，发展慈善事业。建立多种商业保险，形成多层次的社会保障安全网。 

Preventing the pauperization of urban citizens. Efforts should be made to gradually set up and improve the poverty-relief mechanism in cities and carry out the reemployment project by expanding the ways of employment; improve the basic old-age insurance, basic medical insurance, unemployment insurance and the system of guaranteeing a minimum living standard for city residents; widely set up employees' industrial injury insurance and maternity insurance so as to disperse job risks; carry out occupational rehabilitation to help injured workers regain the ability to work; encourage people to help each other and engage in charity; and develop commercial insurance of diverse types and set up a social security network of various levels.

保障老年人权益
Protecting the Rights and Interests of the Elderly 

建立和完善养老保障体系。形成以居家供养为基础、以社区福利服务为依托、以社会福利机构为补充的老年福利服务体系。在城镇建立健全基本养老保险制度，在农村坚持以家庭养老为主，进一步完善社会救济和以保吃、保穿、保住、保医、保葬为内容的“五保”供养制度。逐步建立国家、社会、家庭、个人相结合的养老保障机制，努力提高老年人口的健康和生活质量。 

Establishing and improving the old-age security system. An old-age welfare service system should be set up based on home care, supported by the community welfare service and supplemented by social welfare organizations. It is necessary to set up and improve the basic old-age insurance system in cities and towns while adhering mainly to home-based care of the elderly in rural areas. Meanwhile, efforts should be made to further upgrade social assistance and the "five guarantees" (of food, clothing, housing, medicare and burial expense) and gradually establish an old-age security system combining the state, society, family and individual so as to promote the health and life quality of senior citizens.

创造保障老年人权益的良好的社会环境。建立健全保障老年权益的法律法规和政策，加大执法监督力度，打击虐待、遗弃、迫害老年人的违法行为。弘扬中华民族敬老爱老的传统美德，保障老年人的经济供养、医疗保健、照料慰藉、学习教育、文化娱乐，形成愉快、温暖、祥和的养老环境。鼓励老年人学习科学文化知识，发挥老年人参与社会生活的潜力，倡导和鼓励老年人自主、自助。 

Creating a sound social environment for protecting the rights and interests of the aged. Efforts should be made to set up and improve the policies, laws and regulations for protecting the rights and interests of senior citizens, strengthen the supervision of law enforcement, and fight against the unlawful behavior such as abusing, forsaking and persecuting the elderly; carry forward such traditional Chinese virtues as respecting and loving the aged, ensuring their access to economic support, medical care, appropriate treatment, study, education and cultural entertainment, and providing them with a pleasant, warm and peaceful living environment. Senior citizens should be encouraged to learn science and culture, give full scope to their potentials participating in social life, and cultivate independence and self-assistance.

大力发展老龄产业。研制、开发、生产适宜老年人物质和精神需求的产品，鼓励和引导老年用品市场的发展。走产业化发展的道路，发展城乡养老社会化服务，建立、发展为老年人服务的设施和网络。采取税收、信贷等优惠措施，多渠道筹资，充分利用社会资源，发展老龄产业。 

Promoting the industry for the elderly. Efforts should be made to research and develop products that meet the material and cultural needs of old people, encourage and guide the development of the market centering on old-age household consumption; develop the socialized old-age care service, establish and expand the service facilities and network for the aged through the channel of industrialized development; adopt preferential measures with regard to taxation and loans, raise funds in multiple channels and make full use of social resources to develop the industry for the elderly.

改善人居生态环境 
Improving the Living Eco-environment for the People

增强人口、资源、环境协调发展意识。加强对人口控制、环境保护和资源利用的整体规划，增强人口、资源、环境对经济发展的支撑能力。改变人们对资源、环境的传统思维和行为方式，采取预防为主、污染者付费和强化环境管理等措施，扭转环境恶化的状况，使城乡环境质量明显改善。完善自然资源有偿使用和资源更新的经济补偿制度，提高资源综合利用率和经济效益，遏制资源破坏性开发，缓解人口和经济增长同资源有限性之间的矛盾。

Strengthening people's awareness of the coordinated development of population, resources and environment. Efforts should be made to promote an all-round layout of population control, environmental protection and resource exploitation to enhance the three-pronged support for the economic development; change people's traditional way of thinking and behavior in connection with resources and environment; and take measures such as "putting prevention first," "making those who cause pollution to be responsible for treating it" and strengthening environmental management, so as to put an end to the deterioration of the environment and improve urban and rural environment. Steps should be taken to improve the economic compensation system for use of the natural resources and the renewal of resources, enhance the comprehensive utilization ratio of resources and economic results, stop the destructive exploitation of resources, alleviate the contradiction between population growth, economic growth and the limitation of resources. 

转变生活方式和生产方式。改变过度消耗资源的、高污染的、不可持续的生活方式和生产方式，形成有利于节约资源、保护环境的消费结构和生产方式，促进可持续发展。 

Altering the way of life and production. The resource- consumptive, highly pollutional and unsustainable way of life and production should be changed in favor of a resource-saving and environmental-friendly consumption structure and way of production that will facilitate sustainable development.

保护重点区域生态环境。重点保护和改善人口与环境资源矛盾尖锐区域的生态环境。科学规划、合理设置城市功能区域，提高城市生活污水和垃圾集中处理率，推广使用清洁能源，净化空气，加强绿化。合理和节约利用土地尤其是耕地资源，加强城市环境基础设施建设，规划产业结构和布局，避免走先污染后治理的老路。加强流域污染防治，保证居民饮水安全。改变掠夺性经营开发方式，有计划地退耕还湖、还林、还草，大力开展植树造林，治理水土流失，防止沙漠化，建立生态农业，加强耕地、水源、森林、草场、物种等自然资源和生物多样性保护。

Protecting the eco-environment of key areas. Efforts should be made to specially protect and improve the ecological environment where human and environmental resources clash sharply. City functional areas should be built scientifically and rationally, sewage and garbage disposed centrally, clean energy adopted, air pollution minimized and green belts expanded. Land, arable land in particular, should be used reasonably and economically. Strong measures should be taken to strengthen the building of the urban environmental infrastructure, regulate industrial structure and layout, shun the old way of "first pollution, next treatment," and strengthen the prevention and control of the pollution in river valleys to ensure drinking water security for the inhabitants. Measures should be taken to stop predatory development, draw up plans to restore the land reclaimed from lakes, forests and grasslands to its original state, push forward afforestation, treat soil erosion, prevent desertification, establish ecological agriculture, and strengthen the protection of bio-diversity conservation and natural resources such as arable land, water, forests, grasslands and species.
 
保障设施加强法制建设 

 Safeguard Measures Improving the Legal System
制定、完善法律法规。加快立法步伐，提高立法质量，建立健全人口与发展法律法规。将人口问题作为制定经济和社会法律法规时的重要考虑因素，为贯彻实施基本国策提供法律保障。 

Enacting and improving laws and regulations. Efforts should be made to accelerate legislation and improve its quality, set up and improve the laws and regulations concerning population and development. Population problem should be taken into account as a major factor while formulating economic and social laws and regulations, so as to provide a legal safeguard for implementing the basic national policy.

提高依法管理水平。推进依法行政，提高执法水平，实现基层管理和服务工作的规范化、法制化和科学化。加快基层民主建设，实行民主决策、民主管理、民主监督。加强法制宣传和教育，增强公民的法律意识和法制观念。推行行政执法责任制，提高国家工作人员素质，建立综合治理人口与计划生育的基层管理制度。 

Upgrading the management according to law. Efforts should be made to carry forward administration in accordance with the law and improve the law-enforcement level to realize the standardization, legalization and scientification of management and service at the grass-roots level; accelerate democratic build-up at the grass-roots level to carry out democratic decision-making, management, and supervision; strengthen legal publicity and education to enhance citizens' awareness and understanding of the law; push forward the administrative law-enforcing responsibility system, improve the general quality of the public servants, and establish a management system for comprehensive control of population and family planning at the grass-roots level.

完善法制监督体系。加强执法监督，建立和完善包括司法监督、行政监督、舆论监督、社会监督、群众监督在内的完整的监督体系。建立公开、公示制度。建立行政执法考核评估体系，确保人口与计划生育事业健康发展。 

Improving the system of legal supervision. Efforts should be made to enhance the supervision of law-enforcement, establish and improve a complete supervision system that comprises supervision by the jurisdiction, administration, public opinion, society and the masses. A just and open system should be established, and an examination and assessment system for administrative law enforcement set up so as to ensure the sound development of the population and family planning program.

完善利益导向机制 
Improving the Interest-Oriented Mechanism

建立人口与发展的调控体系。制定与经济社会发展相协调的人口战略和人口规划，建立和完善综合治理人口与计划生育工作的政策体系和管理措施，保持人口同经济社会发展、资源利用、环境保护的平衡关系。 
Establishing a population and development control system. Efforts should be made to formulate a population strategy and regulation complying well with the social and economic development; establish and improve the policy system and management measures for comprehensive population control and family planning; and keep the balance between the population and the socio-economic development, resource utilization and environmental protection.

建立和完善人口与计划生育的利益导向机制。通过发展经济、普及教育、发展医疗卫生保健事业等途径，引导人们自觉实行计划生育。制定适当的经济政策，通过对计划生育户小额贷款、项目优先、科技扶持、政策优惠等措施，把人口与计划生育工作和发展经济、扶贫开发、建设文明幸福家庭相结合，帮助农民解决实际困难，少生快富。 

Establishing and improving the interest-oriented mechanism related to population and family planning. By undertaking economic development, educational popularization and medicare development, people should be encouraged to consciously practice family planning. Proper economic policies should be worked out to integrate the population and family planning program with economic development, development- oriented poverty reduction and the building of a progressive and happy family by providing those family planning households with small-amount loans, priority items, sci-tech assistance and preferential policies, so as to help the farmers cope with their difficulties, have fewer babies and become well-off early.
建立鼓励家庭实行计划生育的激励机制。实施节育补偿、家庭福利、奖励优惠等形式的利益倾斜。对独生子女家庭给予一定数量的奖励费，城市和有条件的地区独生子女父母退休时，可根据实际情况给予必要的补助。对实行计划生育家庭在分配集体经济收入、享受集体福利、划分宅基地、承包土地、就业、就医、住房及子女入托、入学等方面给予优待。 

Establishing an incentive mechanism to encourage the practice of family planning. These will include vibrant subsidy and tangible benefits such as bonus for birth control and family welfare. A certain amount of bonus will be given to families with only one child. In cities, as well as in areas with favorable conditions, when they retire parents with only one child will be granted the necessary subsidies in line with their actual conditions. Families that practice family planning will be offered preferential treatment in allocating the economic income of the collectives, enjoying collective welfare, dividing the land for house-building, contracting for land management, employment, medicare, accommodation, and school and kindergarten admission.

建立有利于人口与发展特别是计划生育的社会保障制度。在农村，建立养老、子女安康、合作医疗、母婴保健保偿、计划免疫保偿和节育手术安全等多种形式的保障制度。在城市，建立健全养老保险、医疗保险、失业保险、生育保险等保障制度。完善城市居民最低生活保障制度，逐步提高最低生活保障水平。鼓励社会参与救助和志愿者服务，解决群众后顾之忧。 

Establishing a social security system conducive to population and development, especially family planning. In the countryside, there should be set up a security system of varied forms relating to old-age support, children's safety and health, cooperative medicare, maternal and child health care, planned immunity and birth-control operation safety. In cities, efforts should be made to set up and improve the security system including old-age, medicare, unemployment and childbearing insurances. The system for ensuring a minimum standard of living for urban residents should be improved and the minimum standard of living gradually raised. The public should be encouraged to participate in social assistance and voluntary service to resolve the actual difficulties of the masses.

加强宣传教育 
Intensifying Publicity and Education

动员全社会和各级政府部门参与和支持人口与计划生育公益性文化建设，形成社会化宣传教育格局。通过大众传媒和群众喜闻乐见的形式，开展面向基层、面向家庭、面向群众的经常性的宣传教育活动，形成人人关心人口与计划生育事业的良好社会氛围。 

Mobilizing the general public and government departments at all levels for involvement in and support for public welfare-oriented cultural development that facilitates the population and family planning program, so as to form a socialized publicity and education format. Regular publicity activities and education programs should be conducted through the mass media or other popular means and oriented toward the local communities, families and the public so as to create a healthy social environment in which all care about the population and family planning program.

发展人口文化事业，推进社会全面进步，建设新型生育文化。培养遵纪守法、夫妻和睦、敬老爱幼的社会公德和家庭美德，形成少生快富、男女平等、晚婚晚育等科学、文明、进步的婚育观、家庭观和养老观，增强全民人口意识。积极开展人口与青春期、性保健知识和老年健康教育，普及避孕节育、优生优育、生殖健康和健康老化的科学知识。 

Developing the population culture, promoting all-round social progress, and fostering a new birth-giving culture. People should be encouraged to cultivate social and family moralities, such as abiding by law and discipline, harmony of couples, respect for the old and love for the young. By doing so, it is intended to cultivate a nationwide sense of population and develop a modern, scientific, and progressive concept of marriage, childbirth, family and old-age support. Included in such a concept are becoming well-to-do based on fewer children, equality between men and women, late marriage and late childbearing. Energetic efforts should be made to offer educational programs on population and puberty, sexual health, and the health of the aged, and to popularize the scientific knowledge on contraception, birth control, good birth and good rearing, reproductive health, and healthy ageing.

建立科技创新体系 
Building Up a Framework for Scientific and Technological Innovation

加强人口与发展学科建设。建立具有世界先进水平的人口与发展学科，促进社会科学和自然科学的结合，推动人口新兴学科、边缘学科、交叉学科发展，形成多学科、多领域的完整的人口学科理论体系。发挥人口科学理论的指导作用，为制定科学的人口与发展政策提供理论支持。 

Intensifying the study of population and development as a field of learning. Efforts should be made to develop an internationally advanced discipline of population and development, boost the combination of the social and natural sciences, and promote the development of demography, borderline discipline and interdisciplinary science, so as to develop a complete demographic theory system embracing many disciplines and fields of study. The instructive role of population science theory will be given full play in providing theoretical support for formulating a scientific population and development policy.

推进科技创新。充分应用现代科学技术的最新研究成果，特别是生物、信息、材料等领域内的最新成果。加强基础科学研究，建立人口与发展科学领域的国家重点实验室、科学技术中心等科技创新基地，提高知识和技术的整体创新能力。扩大人口领域的科研成果，加大生育调节、生殖保健、优生优育及不孕不育等关键技术研究。增强科学研究与技术开发的能力，加大新技术、新产品的开发、引进和推广力度。 

Promoting scientific and technological innovations. China will intensively apply the latest developments of modern science and technology, particularly those in biology, information and materials. Basic science research will be intensified. State key laboratories, centers and other bases for sci-tech innovations in the field of population and development will be established so that the overall capacity of intellectual and technical innovation can be upgraded. Research developments in the field of population will be expanded, and research of key techniques with regard to fertility regulation, reproductive health, healthier births and better childrearing, and infertility intensified. The capacity in scientific research and technological development will be enhanced, and the development, introduction and promotion of new technologies and products intensified.

深化以技术服务为重点的优质服务。以技术服务为重点，围绕生育、节育、不育做好生殖保健服务。积极推进避孕方法知情选择，开展妇女病的普查和防治。健全基层社区医疗保健和技术服务机构，形成适应市场经济的综合服务模式。建立计划生育服务质量保证体系和质量监测体系。改善服务条件，规范服务标准，扩展服务领域，提高服务质量。 

Further promoting quality services, with technical services at the core. Focusing on technical services, the quality of reproductive health services on fertility, birth control and infertility should be bettered. The informed choice of contraceptive measures should be promoted, and public surveys and prevention and treatment of women's diseases conducted. Community medicare and technical service institutions will be improved so that a comprehensive market-oriented service format can be formed. A quality certification system and quality-monitoring framework with regard to family planning service will be established. Service conditions will be improved, services standardized, service areas expanded, and service quality raised.

实现人口与发展信息化管理。建立健全人口管理信息和计划生育、生殖保健服务信息相结合的现代信息收集、报告、分析、发布系统。建立覆盖基层的人口与发展及计划生育信息网络和文献资料库、数据库，实现信息资源共享。利用现代信息技术和手段，及时传播知识、提供信息，进行宣传、科普教育和培训。 

Realizing IT management of the population and development program. China will establish and improve a network of information collection, report, analysis, and announcement, a network which integrates population management information with information on family planning and reproductive health service. It will establish information network and document and data bases that provide grass-roots access to information on population and development and fertility, so that such information can be shared by all. It will use modern information technology and means to spread knowledge, provide information, and offer education and training on popular science.

加大资金投入 
Increasing Capital Input

逐步增加人口与计划生育事业财政投入。建立稳定的投入保障机制，把计划生育经费纳入各级政府的财政预算，切实予以保证。逐步提高中央和地方财政对人口与计划生育经费的投入水平，增加幅度高于财政收入的增长幅度。对中西部、少数民族及灾区等财政困难地区的计划生育事业费实行投入倾斜。 

Gradually increasing financial input in the population and family planning program. China will establish a stable input guarantee mechanism, including family planning expenditures into government budgets at different levels. It will gradually increase central and local financial input in the population and family planning program. The increase of that input should be bigger than the increase of financial revenues. Favorable input should go to the central and western regions, ethnic minority areas and disaster-stricken regions, where financial situations are poor.

建立人口与计划生育事业的政策性投入机制。鼓励企事业单位加大投入。制定优惠政策和奖励措施，利用经济手段，形成良性循环的社会投入机制。建立多渠道筹资体制，鼓励民间捐资、社会募捐和国际捐赠。建立人口与计划生育公益基金和发展基金，在贷款利息、期限等方面给予优惠。鼓励企业和个人投资人口与计划生育项目。 

Working out a policy-related input mechanism for the population and family planning program. Enterprises and institutions are encouraged to increase their input in these areas. Preferential policies and incentive measures will be adopted and economic means used to put into place a sound social input mechanism. A multi-channel fund-raising system will be established, whereby donations from non-governmental sectors, social and international communities will be encouraged. Both public welfare fund and development fund for the population and family planning program will be established with preferential treatment in the interests of loans and their deadlines. Enterprises and individuals are welcome to invest in the population and family planning program.

提高资金使用效益。以边远贫困地区为重点，加强基层人口与计划生育服务网络建设，制定基本建设规划和技术设备标准。根据不同地区的特点，合理配置和利用相关部门的技术服务资源，实现优势互补，提高投入产出效益。完善有关的财政转移支付制度和各级财政拨款制度，加强资金使用的监督管理。 

Increasing the efficiency of fund utilization. Remote poverty-stricken areas will be given priorities in their grass-roots network development with regard to population and family planning services. Basic development plans and standards of technical equipment will be worked out. Regional differences will be taken into consideration while seeking to rationally allocate and use the technical service resources of relevant departments, so as to make the advantages of relevant departments complement each other and raise the input and output efficiency. Relevant financial transfer and payment systems and the budgetary appropriation system at various levels should be improved, and the supervision and management of fund utilization strengthened.

发挥非政府组织和民间社会作用
Attaching Importance to the Role of Non-Governmental and Mass Organizations

发挥妇联、工会、共青团和计划生育协会、老龄组织等非政府组织，居委会、村委会等基层群众自治组织，以及其他社会团体和组织在人口与计划生育管理和服务中的作用。政府创造条件，建立民间社会参与人口与发展事业的政策措施和运行机制，吸收它们参加决策，尊重它们的自主权，为之提供必要的资金、技术、信息和工作指导。

5Encouraging the role of social and non-governmental organizations, like the women's federations, trade unions, Communist Youth League organizations, family planning associations and committees for the aged, grass-roots mass self- government organizations like the neighborhood committees and villagers committees, and other mass bodies and organizations in the management of population and family planning and relevant services. The Government will create conditions to work out policies, measures and an operation mechanism for public involvement in the population and development program and participation in decision making. The right of independence of the non-governmental sectors should be respected. They should also be provided with necessary funds, technology, information and work guidance. 

按照健全组织、经常活动、带头示范、积极服务的要求，加强计划生育协会建设。帮助、支持计划生育协会，结合自身特点开展多种形式的宣传教育和服务，动员、引导群众实行自我教育、自我管理、自我服务，使之成为连接政府和群众的桥梁和纽带。 

Intensifying the build-up of family planning associations in line with the requirements of sound organization, regular activities, exemplary role and active service. With help and support, family planning associations are encouraged to hold publicity and education activities and services of various forms in line with their own characteristics. The masses should be mobilized and instructed to proceed with self-education, self- management and self-service, so that these associations can work as bridges between the government and the people.

扩大国际交流与合作 
Expanding International Exchanges and Cooperation

积极参与国际人口与发展领域的活动，使国际社会全面了解中国的人口政策、发展成就及推动人权事业健康发展所做的努力，在平等和相互尊重的基础上，增进了解，求同存异，扩大共识。 

Actively participating in activities of world population and development, so as to bring home to the international community China's population policy and achievements and its efforts in promoting human rights, to enhance understanding, seek common grounds while reserving differences, and increase consensus on the basis of equality and mutual respect.

加强与国际组织、地区组织以及各国政府和民间团体的合作，拓宽合作领域，扩大合作形式。在人口与计划生育的基础研究、宣传教育、综合服务等方面发展合作项目，建立合作基地，发挥示范作用。开展人口与计划生育领域的双边及多边交流，进行决策、管理和技术人员间的国际交流与培训，掌握、借鉴国际最新科技动态和有益经验。

Intensifying cooperation with international organizations, regional bodies, foreign governments and non-governmental organizations and expanding areas and ways of cooperation with them. Projects of cooperation will involve basic research of population and family planning, publicity and education, and comprehensive services, and cooperation bases will be set up to play an exemplary role in this regard. Bilateral and multi-lateral exchanges in population and family planning will also be conducted, including exchanges and training of personnel in the fields of decision-making, management and technology. Through these exchanges the latest world developments in science and technology and other useful experiences can be learned and drawn upon.
 

中国人权发展50年
Progress in China's Human Rights Cause in 2000 
中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室 
Information Office of the State Council of the Peoples Republic of China 
二000年二月?北京 
February 2000, Beijing

目　　录
Contents
中国人权发展的历史性转折
A Historic Turning Point in the Progress of Human Rights in China
生存权、发展权和经济、社会、文化权利的巨大改善
 Great Improvement in the Rights to Subsistence and Development, and Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
公民、政治权利得到有效保障
 Civil Rights and Political Rights of Citizens Effectively Safeguarded
  妇女、儿童权利的保护
 Protection of the Rights of Women and Children
少数民族的平等权利和特殊保护
 Equal Rights and Special Protection for Ethnic Minorities
中国人权的跨世纪发展前景
 The Cross-Century Development Prospects for Human Rights in China　　
1999年是中华人民共和国成立50周年。半个世纪以来，中国人民在中国政府的领导下，以国家主人的姿态，为消灭贫穷落后，建设富强、民主、文明的国家，实现享有充分人权的崇高理想，进行了长期不懈的探索和矢志不渝的奋斗，使中国的人权状况发生了翻天覆地的变化。
The year 1999 witnessed the 50th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China (PRC). For the previous half century, the Chinese people, led by the Chinese government, had unswervingly probed into and fought for the elimination of poverty and backwardness, the building of a strong and prosperous, culturally advanced, democratic country, and the achievement of the lofty ideal of complete human rights. As a result, the situation of human rights in China has seen tremendous changes.
中国人权发展的历史性转折
A Historic Turning Point in the Progress of Human Rights in China
在半殖民地半封建的旧中国，广大人民长期处于帝国主义、封建主义和官僚资本主义的压迫下，毫无人权可言。
In the old semi-colonial, semi-feudal China, the broad masses were oppressed by imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat capitalism, and had no human rights at all. 
1949年，新中国成立后，中国政府和人民开展了一系列规模宏大的运动，迅速荡涤了旧社会遗留下来的污泥浊水，建立了促进和保护人权的基本社会政治制度，使国家和社会的面貌焕然一新，开创了中国人权发展的新纪元。
after New China was founded in 1949, the Chinese government and people waged a series of large-scale campaigns, rapidly sweeping away the dregs left over from the old society, and established a basic political system which could promote and protect human rights, so that the nation and society took on an entirely new look and a new epoch was started for the progress of human rights in China.

实现和捍卫了真正完全的国家独立，为人权的发展创造了必不可少的前提。旧中国深受外国列强的侵略和奴役，国家主权沦丧，人民的人权失去起码的保障。中国共产党领导的人民民主革命胜利的第一个重要成果就是，将帝国主义列强赶出了中国，从而为中国实现真正的独立自主扫清了道路。新中国成立后，立即废除帝国主义列强强加给中国的一切不平等条约及其攫取的各种特权，坚决没收法西斯国家的在华财产，彻底铲除帝国主义殖民统治在华的政治、经济特权，实现了国家的完全独立。新中国成立初期，以美国为首的西方国家对中国实行政治上不承认、经济上封锁、军事上包围的全面遏制政策，并于1950年悍然发动朝鲜战争，把战火烧到鸭绿江边，企图将人民共和国扼杀在摇篮里。新中国在十分困难的情况下，不畏强暴，被迫进行保家卫国的正义战争，并取得了伟大的胜利，有力地捍卫了国家独立和人民的安全。与此同时，新中国坚定不移地奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，积极倡导和模范遵行和平共处五项原则，发展与世界各国的平等互利、和平友好关系，成功地挫败了国际敌对势力的孤立、封锁、干涉和挑衅，赢得了国际社会的广泛尊敬。真正完全的国家独立的取得，为中国人民按照自己的意愿自主地选择社会政治制度和发展道路，为后来国家的对外开放和稳定健康的发展，进而为人权的不断改善创造了根本前提。
Realizing and upholding genuine and complete national independence, and creating the requisite premise for the progress of human rights. Invaded and enslaved by various foreign powers, old China lost its state sovereignty, and its people's human rights lost their minimum guarantee. The first important achievement of the Communist Party of China (CPC), which led the Chinese people to victory in the people's democratic revolution, was to drive the imperialist invaders out of China, paving the way for China to realize real independence. New China, after its founding, promptly abolished all unequal treaties which had been imposed on China by various imperialist countries and all the privileges they had grabbed from China, resolutely confiscated the property of fascist countries in China, completely uprooted the political and economic privileges of the imperialists' colonial rule in China and realized complete state independence. In the early period after the founding of New China, the Western countries, headed by the United States, carried out a total-containment policy of political non- recognition, economic blockade and military encirclement against China. They brazenly waged the Korean War in 1950, which was extended to the Yalu River, the border of China, in an attempt to strangle the newly founded PRC in the cradle. In spite of great difficulties, New China, defying brute force, was compelled to wage a just war to defend the homeland and achieved a great victory, effectively safeguarding state inde- pendence and the people's security. Meanwhile, New China firmly followed an independent and peaceful foreign policy, actively advocated and earnestly adhered to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, developed relations with foreign countries based on equality, mutual benefit, peace and friendship, successfully frustrated the isolation, blockade, interference and provocation by international antagonistic forces, and won wide respect from international society. The genuine and complete independence of China has created the fundamental premise for the Chinese people's selection of their own social and political systems and a path for development with the initiative in their own hands, for China's opening to the outside world, for steady and healthy development, and for the uninterrupted improvement of human rights in China.
建立和健全人民民主的政治制度，保障人民当家作主的民主权利。1949年召开的中国人民政治协商会议，通过了具有临时宪法性质的《中国人民政治协商会议共同纲领》，选举产生了中央人民政府，宣告了中华人民共和国的诞生。《共同纲领》明确规定，国家政权属于人民，人民依法有选举权、被选举权以及思想、言论、出版、集会、结社、通讯、人身、居住、迁徙、宗教信仰及示威游行的自由权；废除国民党反动政府一切压迫人民的法律、法令和司法制度，制定保护人民的法律、法令，建立人民司法制度。1953年2月，中国颁布《中华人民共和国选举法》，同年12月开始在全国范围内进行普选，登记选民占18岁以上公民的97%，其中85.88%的选民参加了选举，共选出基层代表566.9万人、全国人大代表1226人，具有广泛的代表性。这是中国历史上第一次全国规模的普选运动，实现了人民参与管理国家事务的民主权利。1954年9月，第一届全国人民代表大会第一次会议在北京召开，在充分体现人民民主的基础上，通过了《中华人民共和国宪法》。宪法草案在提交全国人民代表大会审议前，向全国公布交付全国人民讨论两个多月，共有1.5亿人参加讨论，提出116万多条修改补充意见和问题。在如此广泛的全民讨论的基础上制定国家宪法，这不仅在中国历史上是破天荒第一次，而且在世界历史上也属罕见。《宪法》规定了国家的性质和国家机构的职能，规定了公民的权利和义务，奠定了中国民主和法制建设的基础。人民民主的基本政治制度的建立和健全，为人民实现当家作主的权利提供了根本的政治保障。
-Establishing and perfecting the people's democratic political system, and guaranteeing their democratic rights to be masters of their own affairs. The Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), which was inaugurated in 1949, adopted the Common Program of the CPPCC, which served as the country's provisional constitution, elected the Central People's Government, and declared the birth of the PRC. The Common Program clearly stipulated that state power belonged to the people, who, according to the law, had the right to vote and stand for election, and had the freedoms of ideology, speech, the press, assembly, association, correspondence, the person, residence, change of residence, religious belief, demonstration and procession. It also stipulated that all the laws, decrees and judicial systems enacted by the reactionary Kuomintang government to oppress the people had been abolished, that laws and decrees were to be formulated to protect the people, and that the people's judicial system was to be established. In February 1953, China promulgated the Electoral Law of the PRC. In December 1953, a general election was held nationwide. The registered electors accounted for 97 percent of the citizens of and above the age of 18, of whom 85.88 percent participated in the election. They elected 5.669 million grass-roots deputies, and 1,226 deputies to the National People's Congress (NPC). These deputies featured wide representativeness. This was the first nationwide general election in Chinese history; it helped to realize the people's democratic right to participate in the management of state affairs. In September 1954, the First Session of the First NPC was held in Beijing. Based on the people's democracy, the session adopted the Constitution of the PRC. Before being submitted to the NPC for examination, the draft Constitution was made public for the whole country to hold a two-month discussion. About 150 million people took part in the discussion, and put forward more than 1.16 million questions and suggestions for amendments and supplements. The enacting of the national constitution on the basis of such a broad discussion by the whole country was not only unprecedented in Chinese history, but also rare in the history of the world. The Constitution prescribed the character of the state, the functions of state organs, and the rights and duties of citizens, laying a foundation for China's democracy and legal construction. The establishment and improvement of the basic political system on the basis of people's democracy provided a fundamental political guarantee for the realization of the right of the people to be the masters of their own affairs.

实行土地改革和其它民主改革，废除压迫人民的旧制度、旧习俗，扫除各种社会丑恶现象，为新中国的人权发展扫清障碍。
Carrying out the land reform and other democratic reforms, abolishing the old systems and customs which oppressed the people, sweeping away various social evils, and clearing away obstacles to the development of New China's human rights. 
在旧中国，占农村人口不到10%的地主富农占有约80%的土地，而占人口90%以上的贫雇农和中农却只占有约20%的土地。
In old China, landlords and rich peasants, who accounted for less than 10 percent of the rural population, owned some 80 percent of the land, while poor peasants, farm laborers and middle peasants, who accounted for more than 90 percent of the population, owned only about 20 percent of the land.
为解放广大贫苦农民，解放社会生产力，新中国刚成立，便在全国范围内开展了轰轰烈烈的土地改革运动，废除封建地主阶级的土地所有制，实行农民的土地所有制，使全国3亿多无地少地的农民无偿获得了7亿亩土地和大量生产资料，免除了过去每年向地主交纳的约700亿斤粮食的苛重地租，大大改善了广大农民的经济地位和生活状况。与此同时，对国营工矿交通企业的生产和管理制度进行民主改革，废除官僚资本企业遗留下来的封建把头制等各种压迫和奴役工人的旧制度，消除封建行帮、地域观念造成的隔阂，建立工厂管理委员会和职工代表大会，吸收工人参加工厂管理，实现企业管理的民主化，使工人真正成为企业的主人，并调整旧的工资制度，推行劳动保险制度，提高了职工福利，改善了职工生活。
 In order to liberate the broad masses of poverty-stricken peasants and emancipate the social productive forces, New China, just after its founding, launched a vigorous nationwide land reform movement. It abolished land ownership by the feudal landlord class, and delivered the land into the hands of the peasants. As a result, more than 300 million peasants with no or little land got about 46.67 million hectares of land along with the means of production without compensation, and were exempted from the heavy land rent of about 35 billion kilograms of grain, which previously had to be paid to landlords each year, thus greatly improving the economic positions and living conditions of the peasants. At the same time, democratic reforms were carried out in the production and management systems of state-run industrial, mining and transportation enterprises. Various old systems which had oppressed and enslaved workers, such as the feudal gangmasters system practiced by bureaucrat-capitalist enterprises, were annulled. The divisive feudal trade associations and regionalism were abolished. Factory management committees and congresses of workers and staff members were established, which absorbed workers into factory management so as to realize democracy in enterprise management and make workers the real masters of their enterprises. Simultaneously, the old wage system was adjusted, a labor insurance system was introduced, and workers and administrative staff's welfare and living standards were improved.
为解放妇女，废除封建婚姻制度对妇女的歧视和压迫，新中国于1950年颁布第一部法律《中华人民共和国婚姻法》，彻底废除包办强迫、男尊女卑、漠视子女利益的封建主义婚姻制度，实行男女婚姻自由、一夫一妻、男女平等、保护妇女和子女合法利益的新的婚姻制度，并在全国开展了大规模的宣传和贯彻《婚姻法》的群众运动。《婚姻法》的颁布、宣传和实施，使男女平等和婚姻自由的思想深入人心，大量封建婚姻得到解除，打骂、虐待妇女的现象迅速减少，有力地提高了妇女的地位。
To liberate women and abolish the feudal marriage system which discriminated against and oppressed women, in 1950 New China promulgated the Marriage Law of the PRC, which was the first law to be enacted by New China. The law completely abolished the feudal marriage system of arranged and coerced marriages, men's superiority to women, and neglect of the interests of offsprings, and cleared the way for a new marriage system of freedom of marriage, monogamy, equality between men and women, and protection of the lawful rights and interests of women and offsprings. At the same time, large-scale publicity work and a mass movement to put the Marriage Law into effect were carried out nationwide. As a result, the ideas of the equality between men and women and freedom of marriage became deeply rooted in the hearts of the people, and women's status was greatly raised.
 　　卖淫嫖娼、贩毒吸毒、聚众赌博等是旧中国遗留下来的社会丑恶现象，也是危害人民身心健康的社会痼疾。新中国成立伊始即采取果断措施坚决予以禁止。1949年11月北京市第二届人民代表会议率先作出禁娼决定，当即关闭所有妓院，将妓女集中起来进行学习和教育，帮助她们改造思想、医治性病、学习劳动技能，引导和帮助她们建立正常生活，成为自食其力的劳动者。继北京之后，全国各大中小城市纷纷开展禁娼运动，在很短的时间内，就使这种在中国延续三千多年、严重摧残妇女身心健康和尊严的罪恶渊薮绝迹。对于吸毒、赌博等与旧中国反动统治势力和黑社会势力有密切关系的社会病害，人民政府一方面发动群众有力打击，制裁借此谋利的制毒、贩毒者和赌头、赌棍，另一方面进行广泛的宣传教育，提高群众觉悟，让吸毒者、嗜赌者自觉戒毒、戒赌。
Prostitution, drug trafficking and addiction, and gambling are social evils left over from old China, as well as chronic social diseases endangering the people's physical and mental health. They were resolutely prohibited right after the founding of New China. In November 1949, the second people's conference of Beijing took the lead in prohibiting prostitution. The city promptly closed all brothels, and provided education and medical treatment for prostitutes, enabling them to live off their own labor. Following Beijing, all other large, middle-sized and small cities nationwide successively prohibited prostitution. In a short period of time, this hotbed of crimes, which had seriously ruined women's physical and mental health and their dignity for more than 3,000 years in China, was stamped out. As for drug taking, gambling and other social evils which were closely connected with the reactionary ruling forces and the underworld in old China, the people's government, on one hand mobilized the masses to struggle against and punish drug producers, drug traffickers and gambling rings, and on the other it did extensive publicity work so as to enhance the consciousness of the masses, and reform drug addicts and gamblers.
经过两三年的努力，这些在旧中国屡禁不绝的社会瘟疫，就被新中国基本禁绝，社会风气为之一新。
After two to three years of efforts, these social plagues, which had not vanished despite repeated prohibitions in old China, were basically wiped out, and China's social life took a new and healthy turn for the better.

反对民族压迫和歧视，发展民族平等、互助、团结关系，实行民族区域自治制度。
Opposing ethnic oppression and discrimination, devel- oping ethnic equality, mutual aid and unity, and carrying out the ethnic regional autonomy system. 
在旧中国，长期存在着严重的民族歧视和民族压迫，许多少数民族不被承认，境遇悲惨，有的只能躲进深山，过着与世隔绝的生活。
In old China, serious ethnic discrimination and oppression existed for quite a long time; many ethnic minorities, which were not recognized, were in adverse circumstances, and some minority people had to hide themselves deep in the mountains, living in isolation. 
新中国建立后，彻底废除了民族压迫和民族歧视制度，实现了少数民族的翻身解放。为了消除旧中国长期的民族压迫造成的隔阂，1950年至1952年，中央人民政府派出访问团到少数民族地区进行慰问，并组织了各少数民族参观团到首都和祖国各地参观访问，增进了各民族间的了解，融洽了各民族间的感情。1951年，中央人民政府颁布《关于处理带有歧视或侮辱少数民族性质的称谓、地名、碑碣、匾联的指示》，明令废止对少数民族带有歧视性、侮辱性的称谓、地名等。为落实民族平等政策，中国政府从1953年起组织了大规模的民族识别调查工作，认定公布了55个少数民族，使各少数民族在历史上第一次成为祖国民族大家庭中平等的一员。中国政府还从50年代起在全国公民中开展普遍的民族理论和民族政策的宣传教育运动，大力倡导民族平等团结，反对民族主义特别是大汉族主义。
　After the founding of New China in 1949, the Chinese government abolished all ethnic oppression and discrimination, and liberated the minority peoples. To eliminate the estrangement produced by ethnic oppression in old China, the Central People's Government sent, between 1950 and 1952, groups to ethnic minority areas to express sympathy and solicitude, and organized groups of ethnic minorities to visit the capital and other places in China, thus strengthening understanding and friendship among all ethnic groups. In 1951, the Central People's Government promulgated the Directives on the Handling of the Titles, Names of Places, Tablets and Signboards Which Are Discriminative and Insulting to Ethnic Minorities. To carry out the ethnic equality policy, in 1953 the Chinese government started a large-scale program to identify all the country's ethnic peoples. A total of 55 ethnic minorities were identified, thus making each ethnic minority an equal member of China's family of peoples for the first time in history. At the same time, the Chinese government initiated a movement to universally promote and educate Chinese citizens in ethnic theories and policies, strongly advocated ethnic equality and unity, and opposed ethnic chauvinism, especially Han chauvinism.
 　　与此同时，为改变少数民族地区落后的经济社会状况，中国政府在少数民族地区积极稳妥地实行民主改革，在充分尊重少数民族意愿和尊重、保护少数民族的宗教信仰和风俗习惯的前提下，帮助他们改革落后的生产方式和社会制度，发展经济文化事业，使各少数民族的社会发展跨越了几个历史阶段。为从制度上保障少数民族的特殊权益，中国在少数民族聚居地区建立民族自治机关，实行民族区域自治，并于1952年8月颁布《中华人民共和国民族区域自治实施纲要》，对民族区域自治制度的实行作出详细的规定。民族区域自治制度的成功实行，有效地保障了少数民族在祖国大家庭中的平等权利和少数民族管理本民族、本地区事务的自治权利。
　Meanwhile, to change the backward economic and social situation in ethnic minority areas, the Chinese government actively and steadily carried out democratic reforms in the areas inhabited by minority peoples. On the premise of fully respecting the will of ethnic minorities, and respecting and protecting their religious beliefs, customs and habits, the Chinese government helped minority peoples to reform their backward production methods and social systems, and develop economic and cultural undertakings, thus enabling the social development of the ethnic minorities to leap over several historical stages. To guarantee the special rights and interests of ethnic minorities, the Chinese government established ethnic self-government organs and instituted ethnic regional autonomy in the areas where ethnic minorities live in compact communities. In August 1952, China promulgated the Outline for the Implementation of Ethnic Regional Autonomy in the PRC, which specifies the details of the policy of ethnic regional autonomy. The successful implementation of ethnic regional autonomy has effectively guaranteed the equal rights of ethnic minorities in the big family of China, and their right to administer their respective ethnic and local affairs in a self-governing manner.
建立社会主义制度，促进社会经济的发展和人民享受人权水平的提高。新中国成立后，人民政府进行土地改革和其它各项民主改革，并采取有力措施稳定物价，促进经济发展，仅用了三年时间，就迅速医治战争创伤，使国民经济和人民生活恢复到历史的最高水平。在此基础上，中国政府不失时机地对农业、手工业和资本主义工商业进行社会主义改造，从根本上消灭人剥削人的社会制度，建立了社会主义的基本经济制度。中国人民从此成了生产资料的主人和社会财富的享有者，从而焕发出了建设新国家和新生活的积极性，推动了社会经济的快速发展和人民生活水平的提高。据统计，1957年，全国工业总产值比1952年增长128.3%，年平均增长18%，农业总产值增长25%，全国居民平均消费水平提高1/3强。社会主义制度的建立，为全国人民在平等参与经济发展和分享劳动成果的基础上不断改善人权状况，提供了基本的社会制度保证。
Establishing the socialist system, and promoting social and economic development and the improvement of the people's enjoyment of human rights. After the founding of New China, the People's Government carried out the land reform and other democratic reforms, and adopted powerful measures to stabilize prices and promote economic development. It took only three years for China to heal the wounds of war, and build the national economy and the people's livelihood to the highest level in history. On this basis, the Chinese government lost no time in starting the socialist transformation of agriculture, handicraft industry and capitalist industry and commerce, thus fun- damentally eliminating the system of exploitation of man by man and establishing a basic socialist economic system. Since then, the Chinese people have become the masters of their means of production and the owners of the wealth of society, thus calling forth their enthusiasm for building a new country and creating a new life, and promoting the rapid development of society and the economy, and the improvement of the people's livelihood. According to statistics, the nation's total industrial output value in 1957 increased by 128.3 percent over that of 1952, with an average annual growth of 18 percent; the total agricultural output value rose by 25 percent; and the average consumption level of all the people in the country grew by more than one third. The establishment of the socialist system has provided the basic guarantee for the people throughout the country to constantly improve their human rights situation on the basis of equal participation in economic development and sharing the fruits of labor.

新中国通过这些深刻的社会变革，革故鼎新，不仅实现了人权发展的历史性转折，而且为此后的进一步探索和人权事业的进步与发展开辟了一个崭新的起点。
Through these profound social reforms, involving getting rid of the old and creating the new, New China has not only realized a historic turning point in the development of human rights, but also initiated a brand-new starting point for further exploration and the progress and development of the cause of human rights.     
生存权、发展权和经济、社会、文化权利的巨大改善
      Great Improvement in the Rights to Subsistence and Development, and Economic, Social and Cultural Rights

新中国成立50年来，特别是改革开放以来，中国政府始终把解决人民的生存权和发展权问题放在首位，坚持以经济建设为中心，大力发展社会生产力，使经济和社会发展突飞猛进，综合国力显著增强，人民生活水平大幅度提高，实现了从贫困到温饱和从温饱到小康的两次历史性跨越。
In the past 50 years since the founding of New China, especially since the initiation of reform and opening to the outside world some 20 years ago, the Chinese government has always put the people's rights to subsistence and development first, focused on economic construction, and made efforts to develop social productivity. Consequently, China's economy and society have advanced by leaps and bounds, its comprehensive national strength has been raised, and the people's livelihood has improved by a large margin thereby realizing two historic leaps-bringing the people from poverty to having enough to eat and wear, and then to living a better-off life.
1952年，中国国内生产总值只有679亿元，到1998年已达到79396亿元，扣除物价上涨因素，年平均增长7.7%，是同期世界平均增长率的2.5倍以上。1952年至1998年，工业增加值按可比价格计算增长158倍，年平均增长11.6%；农业增加值增长3.5倍，年平均增长3.3%。对外贸易总额由1950年的11.3亿美元增至1998年的3239亿美元，增长286倍，年平均增长12.5%。据联合国有关机构估计，中国目前的经济总量已跃居世界第7位，外贸总额居世界第11位，外汇储备居世界第2位，综合国力居世界第9位。如今，中国在12天时间创造的国民生产总值就相当于1952年全年的总和。钢、煤、水泥、化肥、电视机和谷物、肉类、棉花、花生、油菜籽、水果等重要工农业产品的产量已跃居世界第一。1949年至1998年，中国粮食总产量由1.1亿吨增加到5.1亿吨，增长3.5倍，年平均增长3.1%，高于同期世界增长速度；中国粮食总产量占世界粮食产量的比重由17%上升到25%。目前，中国的粮食总产量已跃居世界首位，粮食、肉、蛋和水产品等的人均占有量超过世界平均水平，彻底改变了旧中国多数人口长期处于饥饿半饥饿的状况，创造了以占世界7%耕地解决占世界22%人口吃饭问题的奇迹。
　In 1952, China's GDP was only 67.9 billion RMB yuan, a figure which rose to 7,939.6 billion RMB yuan in 1998, with an average annual growth rate of 7.7 percent allowing for price rises, or over 2.5 times the average world growth rate in the same period. From 1952 to 1998, the industrial added value increased by 159 times calculated according to the constant prices, with an average annual growth rate of 11.6 percent; the agricultural added value increased by 4.5 times, with an average annual growth rate of 3.3 percent; and the total foreign trade volume increased from US$ 1.13 billion in 1950 to US$ 323.9 billion in 1998, or an increase of 287 times, with an average annual growth rate of 12.5 percent. According to a United Nations estimate, China ranks seventh in the world in terms of the size of its economy; 11th in total foreign trade volume; second in foreign exchange reserves; and ninth in comprehensive national strength. At present, the GNP created by China within 12 days is equivalent to the GNP of the whole year of 1952. Now China leads the world in the output of steel, coal, cement, chemical fertilizer, TV, crops, meat, cotton, peanuts, rapeseed, fruit and other important industrial and agricultural products. China's total grain output increased from 110 million tons in 1949 to 510 million tons in 1998, or an increase of over 4.5 times, with an average annual growth rate of 3.1 percent, higher than the world growth rate during the same period. Meanwhile, the proportion of China's grain output in the world's total increased from 17 percent to 25 percent. At present, China ranks first in the world in terms of total grain output, and the average per-capita amount of grain, meat, eggs and aquatic products exceeds the world average level. Hence, China has thoroughly changed the situation which prevailed in old China in which the majority of the Chinese population lived in a state of starvation or semi-starvation, and has created the miracle of supporting 22 percent of the total population of the world on only 7 percent of the world's total cultivated land.
城乡居民生活连续上了几个大台阶，消费水平明显提高。1949年，城镇居民人均现金收入不足100元，农村居民人均纯收入不足50元；到1978年，城镇居民人均可支配收入增至343元，农村居民人均收入增至134元。而1978年至1998年，城乡居民人均收入分别增加到5425元和2162元，扣除物价因素，实际增长2.3倍和3.6倍，年平均增长6.1%和7.9%。居民实际消费水平由1952年的每人80元提高到1998年的2972元，城乡居民储蓄存款由8.6亿元增加到53408亿元。新中国成立之初，城乡居民用于吃和穿的开支占全部生活费收入支出的80%，农村居民高达90%以上。到1998年，这个比重已分别下降到55.6%和59.6%。
The livelihoods of both urban and rural people have leaped several stages in succession, and the consumption level has improved remarkably. In 1949, the average annual income per urban resident was less than 100 RMB yuan, and that per rural resident, less than 50 RMB yuan. In 1978, the average annual income per urban resident came to 343 RMB yuan, and that per rural resident, 134 RMB yuan. Between 1978 and 1998, the average annual income per urban resident increased to 5,425 RMB yuan, or an increase of 3.3 times allowing for price rises, with an average annual growth rate of 6.1 percent, and that per rural resident, to 2,162 RMB yuan, or an increase of 4.6 times allowing for price rises, with an average annual growth rate of 7.9 percent. The annual net consumption level of the people increased from 80 RMB yuan per capita in 1952 to 2,972 RMB yuan in 1998, and the savings deposits of both urban and rural residents grew from 860 million RMB yuan to 5,340.8 billion RMB yuan. In the early days of New China, 80 percent of urban residents' income was used to buy food and clothes, and 90 percent in rural areas, which dropped to 55.6 percent and 59.6 percent, respectively, in 1998.
城镇居民的恩格尔系数(食品支出占消费支出的比重)改革开放之前一直在57%以上，到1998年已降至44.5%，生活消费总体上已达到小康水平。1954年，农村居民的恩格尔系数高达69%，到1998年，农村居民的消费结构已大大改善，恩格尔系数已降至53.3%，文化娱乐、服务性支出及其他支出在生活消费支出中所占的比重已提高为25.4%，居住和穿的比重分别为15.1%和6.2%。这表明农民的消费中生存资料比重已明显下降，发展和享受资料的比重显著提高。如今，全国95%以上的农民过上了温饱有余的生活，25%左右的农户已过上了小康生活。
The Engel coefficient (the proportion of food expenditure in consumer expenditure) of urban residents was always over 57 percent before the policy of reform and opening to the outside world was introduced, a figure which dropped to 44.5 percent in 1998, and consumption has reached the well-off level as a whole. In 1954, the Engel coefficient of rural residents was as high as 69 percent. By 1998, the consumption structure of rural residents had been greatly improved, with the Engel coefficient decreasing to 53.3 percent; their cultural, recreational and service expenditures had risen to 25.4 percent; and the proportions of accommodation and clothing expenditures were 15.1 percent and 6.2 percent, respectively. This indicates that in consumption the proportion dedicated to mere means of subsistence has remarkably decreased, and that dedicated to development and enjoyment has greatly risen. At present, over 95 percent of rural people in China have enough to eat and wear, and about 25 percent of them live well-off lives.
 　　在大力发展经济、普遍提高全国人民生活水平的同时，中国致力于解决贫困人口的温饱问题。特别是改革开放以来，中国将解决贫困人口的温饱问题作为最紧迫的大事，由国家统一规划和部署，在全国范围内开展了有计划、有组织、大规模的扶贫开发工作，20年共解决2亿多农村贫困人口的温饱问题，使全国农村贫困人口由1978年的2.5亿减少到1998年的4200万，贫困人口占农村人口的比重由30.7%下降到4.6%。贫困人口的年平均纯收入由1985年的206元提高到1998年的1318元，贫困地区的生产生活条件明显改善。近20年来，世界贫困人口逐年递增，贫困程度不断加深，而中国的贫困人口则以平均每年1000万的速度递减，成为世界上贫困人口减少最快的国家。1999年，世界银行、联合国开发计划署在对中国扶贫开发工作进行全面研究后发表报告指出：“在全世界许多地方贫困人口普遍增加的时候，中国是个例外。”“中国在解决绝对贫困问题上所取得的成就举世公认”。
While making great efforts to develop the economy and improve the living standards of the people throughout the country, China has spared no effort to help poverty-stricken people have enough to eat and wear. Especially since the adoption of the policy of reform and opening to the outside world, the Chinese government has regarded it as a most urgent task to help poverty-stricken people have sufficient food and clothing. According to the government's unified plan and arrangements, a large-scale help-the-poor drive has been started throughout the country in a planned way. Over the past 20 years, the Chinese government has helped more than 200 million rural people get enough food and clothes, and has reduced the number of poverty-stricken rural population from 250 million in 1978 to 42 million. The proportion of poverty-stricken people in the total rural population has decreased from 30.7 percent to 4.6 percent. The average annual net income of poverty-stricken people increased from 206 RMB yuan in 1985 to 1,318 RMB yuan in 1998, and the production conditions and living standards of poverty-stricken areas have greatly improved. In the past 20 years, the poverty-stricken population worldwide has risen year by year, and the poor have become poorer. In China, however, the number of poverty-stricken people has been decreasing by 10 million every year on average, making China lead the world in the speed of reducing the number of poverty-stricken people. In 1999, the World Bank and the UN Development Program issued a report after a comprehensive survey of China's help-the-poor work, which points out that the number of poverty-stricken people is increasing in many places in the world, but China is an exception as it has achieved world-renowned progress in solving the poverty problem."

在旧中国，每遇重大自然灾害发生，总是饿殍遍野。
In old China, whenever serious natural disasters befell, the exposed bodies of those who had died from starvation could be found everywhere.
1931年华东地区发生水灾，14.5万人死亡。
In 1931, when eastern China was affected by floods, 145,000 people died as a result. 
新中国极其重视救灾救济工作，努力保护和抢救人民的生命财产，保障灾区人民的基本生活。
New China pays great attention to relief work, and makes every effort to protect and save people's lives and property, and ensure the basic needs of life of people in disaster-stricken areas.
据初步统计，新中国成立50年来，中央下拨的特大自然灾害救济补助款300多亿元，为22亿多人次解决了因灾缺粮的困难，帮助8亿多人次重建家园，重建倒塌房屋1亿多间，为2亿多人次提供衣物数十亿件，为10多亿人次治愈了因灾引起的疾病。
 According to preliminary statistics, in the past 50 years since the founding of the PRC, the Central Government has allocated more than 30 billion RMB yuan as relief funds for serious natural disasters, solving the problem of provisions in 2.2 billion cases, helping over 800 million people rebuild their homes, rebuilding more than 100 million collapsed houses, providing billions of items of clothing for 200-odd million people and curing a billion cases of disease or injury resulting from disasters.


劳动者的权利得到了最大程度的实现。1949年，失业人口总计达474.2万人，失业率为23.65%。此外，农村破产的农民还有几千万人。1998年，全国城乡从业人员达到69957万人；全国城镇登记失业人员571万人，登记失业率为3.1%。建立了国有企业下岗职工基本生活保障制度、失业保险制度和城镇居民最低生活保障制度三条保障线，下岗职工和失业人员的基本生活得到了有效保障。劳动者的劳动报酬迅速增长。全国城镇职工年平均工资由1952年的445元提高到1998年的7479元，按可比价格计算，增长了2.8倍。职工工作时间按法律规定由过去的每日工作8小时、每周工作48小时缩短为目前的每日工作8小时、每周工作40小时。1949年前，全国只有几所培训技术工人的学校，且规模很小，如今已形成了多形式、多层次、基本适应经济建设需要的职业教育与职业培训体系，城镇新增劳动力接受各类培训的比重达到70%。
The rights of workers have been realized to the full. In 1949, the number of unemployed workers was 4.742 million, with an unemployment rate of 23.65 percent. In addition, millions upon millions of peasants were bankrupt. In 1998, the number of employed people nationwide totaled 699.57 million, and the number of registered unemployed persons was 5.71 million, with a registered unemployment rate of 3.1 percent. Three security systems-the basic living security system for people laid off by state-owned enterprises, unemployment insurance and the basic living security system for residents of cities and towns-have been established, and thus the basic needs of life of laid-off and unemployed people have been effectively guaranteed. Meanwhile, wages have been rising rapidly; the average annual income of employees in cities and towns increased from 445 RMB yuan in 1952 to 7,479 RMB yuan in 1998, or an increase of 3.8 times based on comparable prices. According to law, the working time has been shortened from eight hours a day and 48 hours a week in the past to the present eight hours a day and 40 hours a week. Before the founding of the PRC, there were only a few small training schools for technicians in the whole country. But now, a multi-form and multi-layer vocational education and training system has been established, basically meeting the needs of economic construction. The proportion of new employees in cities and towns receiving various types of training has reached 70 percent.
在旧中国，没有真正面向广大劳动者的社会保障制度。新中国投入大量资金发展和完善社会保障事业，逐步形成渐趋完善的社会保障体系。
There was no social security system for employees in old China, but in New China a comprehensive and well-funded social security system has gradually emerged. 
目前，除部分企业职工仍然由企业负担退休费用外，参加企业基本养老保险社会统筹的职工达9433万人，职工覆盖面为84%，参加企业基本养老保险的离退休人员达2800多万人。截止1999年底，失业保险覆盖职工达9912万人，国家通过失业保险共救济失业人员1500多万人，同时还帮助750多万失业人员实现了再就业。新中国成立后，国家建立了公费、劳保医疗制度。到1998年底，全国有17781万人享受公费医疗和劳保医疗。目前，全国有1700多个市县实行了工伤保险费用社会统筹，涉及职工达3780多万人；有1412个市县实行了生育保险费用社会统筹，涉及职工达2777万人。到1999年10月止，全国668个城市和1638个县城已全部建立居民最低生活保障制度，有200多万贫困居民受益。
At present, except for some ex-employees whose pensions are still paid by their old enterprises, the number of people participating in the basic retirement insurance policy is 94.33 million, a coverage rate of 84 percent. Among them, there are more than 28 million retired people. At the end of 1999, a total of 99.12 million employees were covered by unemployment insurance, more than 15 million unemployed were receiving relief funds and 7.5 million unemployed people had been re-employed. Since the founding of New China, the state has set up free medical services and a labor-protection medical care system at public expense, and at the end of 1998, 177.81 million persons were benefiting from these services. Insurance against injury at work is now practiced in more than 1,700 cities and counties throughout the country, covering over 37.8 million employees, and childbirth insurance is available in 1,412 cities and counties, covering 27.77 million women employees. By the end of October 1999, 668 cities and 1,638 counties in the country had established systems for ensuring basic living needs, benefiting two million residents living in poverty.
在旧中国，人民享受不到最基本的卫生医疗服务。
In old China there was not even the most basic medical and health service for ordinary people.
如今，医疗机构遍布城乡，医疗卫生服务体系基本形成。1949年，全国的医疗卫生机构仅有3670家，医疗病床8.46万张，卫生技术人员50.5万人；每千人口拥有医疗床位0.15张、卫生技术人员0.93人、医生0.67人、护士(师)0.06人。到1998年，全国卫生机构已达到31.41万家，医疗床位314.3万张，卫生技术人员442.37万人；每千人口拥有医疗床位2.4张，卫生技术人员3.64人，医生1.65人，护士(师)1人。人民的健康水平大大提高。急性传染病发病率由1949年前的2万/10万下降到203.4/10万。人口死亡率由1949年前的33‰下降到1994年的6.49‰。国民平均预期寿命已从1949年前的35岁提高到目前的70.80岁，比发展中国家的平均指数高出10岁，达到中等发达国家的水平。
 But nowadays, medical institutions can be found everywhere, and a comprehensive medical and health service system has begun to emerge. In 1949, China had only 3,670 medical institutions, 84,600 hospital beds and 505,000 medical and health personnel, and there was only 0.15 hospital bed, 0.93 medical and health personnel, 0.67 doctor and 0.06 nurse (paramedic) per thousand people. In 1998, China had 314,100 health institutions, 3.143 million hospital beds and 4.4237 million medical and health personnel, and there were 2.4 hospital beds, 3.64 medical and health personnel, 1.65 doctors and one nurse (paramedic) per thousand people. The people's health has greatly improved. The incidence of acute epidemic diseases has decreased from 20,000 per 100,000 people before the founding of the PRC to 203.4 per 100,000 people; the death rate, from 33 per 1,000 people to 6.49 per 1,000 people in 1994. The average life expectancy of Chinese people has increased from 35 years before 1949 to 70.8 years at present, 10 years longer than that of the developing countries and the same as that of the medium-developed countries.

在旧中国，文化教育水平极低，广大劳动人民极少有受教育的机会。
Culture and education in old China were extremely backward. Most working people had almost no opportunity to receive education.
新中国采取各种措施，大力发展教育事业，公民的受教育权得到了切实的保障和实现。
the right to receive education in New China is guaranteed and realized.
1998年，全国已有73%的人口地区普及了九年义务教育，小学学龄儿童入学率由1949年前的20%左右提高到99.3%，初中阶段毛入学率达到87.3%，超过发展中国家的同期平均水平。
In 1998, nine-year compulsory education was practiced in areas where 73 percent of the population live. The enrollment rate for primary school-age children has increased from 20 percent before 1949 to 99.3 percent, and for junior middle school-age children, 87.3 percent. These figures exceed the average figures for developing countries in the corresponding period.
新中国成立50年共扫除文盲2.3亿，全国总人口文盲率由80%以上下降到14.5%，其中青壮年文盲率已下降到5.5%以下。
Over the past 50 years, 230 million illiterates have been taught to read and write, the illiteracy rate has decreased from 80 percent of the total population to 14.5 percent; adult illiteracy rate has decreased to below 5.5 percent. 
1998年，普通高校和普通中等学校的在校生人数比1949年前的最高年份分别增长了21.99倍和40.11倍；
In 1998, the numbers of students enrolled in institutions of higher learning and middle schools had increased by 22.99 and 41.11 times, respectively, compared to the highest figures before 1949
全国受教育人口近3亿，在校正规学习的人口达到2.3亿。
the educated population was close to 300 million persons, and the number of students enrolled reached 230 million persons.
1949至1990年，普通高等学校培养研究生、本科和专科毕业生累计达760.82万人，是旧中国1912至1948年间毕业生总数的近40倍。
Between 1949 and 1990, the total number of postgraduates and graduates from universities and colleges was 7.6082 million, nearly 40 times the total for the years from 1912 to 1948.

50年来，中国在实现人民的生存权、发展权和经济、社会、文化权利方面取得了举世公认的成就。美国《纽约时报》1999年10月1日社论和《国际先驱论坛报》9月29日文章分别指出：“中国在解决世界四分之一人口的吃、穿、住方面取得的巨大成就将被载入史册”；“普通的中国公民现在享有的健康、营养、教育和生活水准比这个中央王国漫长历史上的任何时候都要高”。
China has made universally acknowledged achievements in realizing its people's rights to subsistence and development, and economic, social and cultural rights over the past 50 years. Articles published on October 1, 1999 in the New York Times and on September 29, 1999 in the International Herald Tribune point out that the great achievement made by China in solving the problems of food, clothing and housing for one quarter of the world's population will go down in the annals of history. "Today, ordinary Chinese citizens enjoy better health, nutriment, education and living standards than in any period in the Middle Kingdom's long history."
     
公民、政治权利得到有效保障
 Civil Rights and Political Rights of Citizens Effectively Safeguarded
新中国成立以来，中国的民主法制建设取得重大进展，人民的公民权利和政治权利依法得到维护和保障。
Since the founding of the People's Republic, China has made great progress in its efforts to build its democratic and legal systems, and people's civil rights and political rights are maintained and guaranteed according to law.
 　　中国宪法明确规定：“中华人民共和国的一切权力属于人民。”全国人民代表大会和地方各级人民代表大会作为人民行使国家权力的机关，由人民民主选举产生，对人民负责，受人民监督。在中国，除依法被剥夺政治权利的人以外，凡年满18周岁的公民，不分民族、种族、性别、职业、家庭出身、宗教信仰、教育程度、财产状况和居住期限，都有选举权和被选举权。目前，中国有99.97%的18岁以上的公民享有选举权和被选举权。从参加选举的情况来看，全国的参选率一直都在90%以上。在各级人民代表大会中，各地区、各民族及各个阶层、各种团体都有自己一定比例的代表。1998年初选出的九届全国人大代表共2979名，其中，工人农民占18.9%，知识分子占21.08%，干部占33.17%，民主党派和无党派爱国人士占15.44%，解放军占9%，香港特别行政区代表占1.17%，归国华侨占1.24%。
China's Constitution clearly states that "All power in the People's Republic of China belongs to the people." The organs through which the people exercise state power are the NPC and local people's congresses. Deputies to the people's congresses at all levels are elected, and are responsible to and accept supervision from the people. In China, except for those who have been deprived of their political rights, all citizens aged 18 or above, irrespective of ethnic status, race, sex, occupation, family background, religious belief, education, property status or length of residence, have the right to vote and stand for election. At present, 99.97 percent of China's citizens aged 18 or above enjoy the right to vote and stand for election. According to statistics, the voting rate all over the country has maintained a level of over 90 percent. Every region, ethnic group, social stratum, organization and group has its proportion of representatives in the people's congresses at all levels. Of the 2,979 deputies elected to the Ninth NPC in 1998, 18.9 percent were workers and peasants, 21.08 percent were intellectuals, 33.17 percent were cadres, 15.44 percent were representatives of various democratic parties and non-party patriots, 9 percent were representatives of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), 1.17 percent were representatives from the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, and 1.24 percent were returned overseas Chinese.
 　　全国人大是最高国家权力机关，制定国家法律，决定国家重大事项，选举产生国家行政机关、审判机关和检察机关并对它们实行监督。中国实行依法治国。改革开放以来，全国人民代表大会及其常委会制定了360多项法律和关于法律问题的决定，地方各级人大制定地方性法规7000多件。全国人大及其常委会听取和审议国务院及其部门和最高人民法院、最高人民检察院的工作报告，对法律和有关法律问题的决定的实施情况进行检查。全国人大各专门委员会也开展形式多样的执法检查。全国人大常委会还受理人民来信来访，监督司法机关的工作，依法保障公民的合法权利。
As the highest organ of state power, the NPC is responsible for drawing up state laws, deciding on important state affairs and electing the members of state administrative, judicial and procuratorial organs, and supervising them. China runs state affairs according to law. Since the introduction of the policy of reform and opening to the outside world in the late 1970s, the NPC and its Standing Committee have enacted more than 360 laws and legal decisions, and the local people's congresses at different levels have drawn up more than 7,000 local regulations. The NPC and its Standing Committee hear and examine and discuss the work reports of the State Council and its departments as well as the Supreme People's Court and the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and examine the implementation of laws and legal decisions. The special committees of the NPC also conduct various types of examinations of law enforcement work. In addition, the Standing Committee of the NPC receives petitions from citizens, supervises the work of judicial organs and safeguards citizens' legal rights according to law.
 　　中国共产党领导的多党合作和政治协商制度是中国民主政治制度的重要组成部分。民主党派作为与共产党亲密合作的参政党，参加国家政权，参与国家大政方针和国家领导人选的协商，参与国家事务的管理和国家方针、政策、法律、法规的制定执行。有关国家的重大问题，执政的中国共产党都要反复向各民主党派征求意见，协商解决。在第九届全国人民代表大会中，民主党派、无党派人士占全国人大常委会委员和人大常设专门委员会委员的30%和21.9%。目前，在国务院有关部委和最高人民法院、最高人民检察院，都有民主党派成员和无党派人士担任领导职务。在31个省、自治区、直辖市和15个副省级市，也都有民主党派成员和无党派人士担任副省(市)长或省(市)长助理。
The system of multi-party cooperation and political consultation led by the CPC is an important part of China's democratic political system. As parties friendly to the CPC, the eight non-Communist parties participate in government and political affairs, engaging in consultations concerning state policies and leadership candidates, management of national affairs, and the drawing up and implementation of state policies, laws and regulations. On key state issues, the CPC-the party in power-always consults the other parties, solicits their suggestions and negotiates with them. At the Ninth NPC, representatives from the non-Communist parties and non-party personages accounted for 30 percent and 21.9 percent of the Standing Committee and permanent special committees of the NPC, respectively. At present, in the departments of the State Council, the Supreme People's Court and the Supreme People's Procuratorate, members of the non-Communist parties and non-party personages occupy some senior positions. At the same time, in the country's 31 provinces, autonomous regions, municipalities directly under the Central Government and 15 cities at sub-provincial level, members of the non-Communist parties and non-party personages hold the posts of deputy governor of a province or deputy mayor or assistant to the governor of a province or to a mayor.
 　　各级政治协商会议由各党派、人民团体和无党派人士等组成，其成员具有广泛的代表性。政协第九届全国委员会委员来自34个界别，其中民主党派、全国工商联、无党派人士占全国政协委员和常委的59.5%、63.4%。政协组织通过政治协商、民主监督和参政议政，在国家政治生活中发挥着重要作用。据统计，自1990年以来，中共中央、国务院同民主党派中央、无党派人士的协商会、座谈会已召开100多次。从1992年到1998年，八个民主党派中央和全国工商联，就改革开放、经济建设、民主法制建设、反腐倡廉等重大课题，向中共中央、国务院及各有关部门提出的重要建议就有100多项，不少已被中共中央和国务院采纳。
The people's political consultative conferences at different levels consist of members of all political parties and people's organizations, and non-party personages, with a widespread representation. The members of the National Committee of the Ninth CPPCC come from 34 circles, among them, the non-Communist parties, the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce and non-party personages, accounting for 59.5 percent of the CPPCC National Committee members and 63.4 percent of the CPPCC National Committee's Standing Committee members. The political consultative organizations play an important role in the state's political life by means of political consultation, democratic supervision and participation in the administration and discussion of state affairs. Since 1990, more than 100 consultation meetings and forums have been held between the Central Committee of the CPC, the State Council and the central committees of the non-Communist parties and non-party personages. Between 1992 and 1998, the central committees of the eight democratic parties and the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce put forward more than 100 important suggestions concerning reform and opening up, economic construction, democratic and legal system building, anti-corruption efforts and the promotion of clean government to the Central Committee of the CPC, the State Council and relevant departments. Many of these suggestions have been adopted by the Central Committee of the CPC and the State Council.
 　　基层民主是保障公民直接行使各项民主权利的重要途径。农村人民群众通过直接选举村民委员会成员、民主讨论决定本村重大事务等，充分行使民主选举、民主决策、民主管理和民主监督的权利。1988年以来，全国农村普遍进行了3—4届村民委员会的换届选举，多数村民委员会建立了村民会议、村民代表会议和村务公开制度。1999年新的《村民委员会组织法》颁布实行后，有近一半的省、市、自治区颁布了本行政区域的村委会选举法规。村委会的选举愈益规范，村民的提名权得到尊重，预选产生正式候选人、正式候选人的平等竞争、差额选举、发表演说、秘密划票间、公开计票、当场宣布选举结果等确保选民权利的程序逐步走向规范化。据统计，1999年度完成村委会选举的省份，农民的参选率绝大部分在90%以上，最低的也在85%以上。
Democracy at the grass-roots level is an important means for ensuring that citizens directly exercise their democratic rights. By directly electing members of villagers' committees and deciding upon major affairs of their villages through democratic discussions, the rural masses fully exercise their rights of democratic election, democratic policy-making, democratic management and democratic supervision. Since 1988, rural areas throughout China have already carried out three or four elections of new villagers' committees. Most of the villagers' committees have established villagers' congresses and representative conferences and the system of making public village affairs. Since the promulgation of the new Organic Law on Villagers' Committees in 1999, nearly half of the provinces, municipalities directly under the Central Government and autonomous regions have published their own laws and regulations on the election of villagers' committees. The election of villagers' committees has been increasingly standardized, and villagers' right to nominate candidates is respected. The election procedure, which guarantees the rights of voters, has been gradually regularized. The procedure involves the methods by which villagers select formal candidates through preliminary elections, formal candidates run for the election on an equal footing, voters choose from among a large number of candidates, candidates make speeches, voters mark their ballots in specially-designated rooms, ballots are counted openly, and the election results are announced on the spot. Statistics show that in provinces where elections of members for a new term of office on the villagers' committees were completed in 1999, the proportion of peasants taking part in the elections reached more than 90 percent in most cases and more than 85 percent in other cases.
 　　中国依法保障公民享有广泛的基本自由和权利。宪法明确规定，公民有言论、出版、集会、结社、游行、示威和宗教信仰的自由；公民的人身自由、人格尊严和住宅不受侵犯；公民的通信自由和通信秘密受法律保护。国家大力发展新闻出版事业，为公民行使言论、出版自由提供良好的条件。据统计，1998年，全国共出版报纸2053种300.4亿份，各类杂志期刊7999种25.4亿册，图书13余万种72.4亿册；共有广播电台294座，中央和省级有线和无线电视台560座，县级广播电视台1287座，教育电视台75座，全国电视人口覆盖率达到89%以上，电视观众达10亿多。截至1999年6月，中国已有上网计算机146万台，上网用户400万人。在中国，凡符合宪法和法律规定，并履行必要的登记手续而组成的社会团体，均受国家保护。截至1998年底，全国共有社团165600个，它们的组织活动等都依法受到宪法和法律保护。
　China guarantees, according to law, that citizens enjoy extensive basic freedoms and rights. The Constitution clearly states that citizens enjoy freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly, of association, of procession, of demonstration and of religious belief. Freedom of the person and personal dignity, and the residences of citizens are inviolable. Freedom and privacy of correspondence of citizens are protected by law. The state has made vigorous efforts to develop press and publications undertakings, creating favorable conditions for citizens to enjoy freedom of speech and the press. Statistics show that 1998 witnessed the publishing of 30.04 billion copies of newspapers of 2,053 titles, 2.54 billion copies of magazines of 7,999 titles and 7.24 billion copies of books of more than 130,000 titles. There were 294 radio stations, 560 cable and wireless TV stations at the central and provincial levels, 1,287 broadcasting and TV stations at the county level and 75 educational TV stations. The national TV network covered over 89 percent of the population, with an audience of more than one billion. By June 1999, some 1.46 million computers in China had been connected with the Internet, with the Internet users totaling four million. In China, all social organizations that meet the regulations of the Constitution and other laws and are formed through necessary registration procedures are protected by the state. By the end of 1998, China had a total of 165,600 social organizations. These organizations and their activities are subject to the protection of the Constitution and other laws.
 　　国家保护公民的宗教信仰自由和正常的宗教活动。任何国家机关、社会团体和个人不得强制公民信仰宗教或者不信仰宗教，不得歧视信仰宗教的公民和不信仰宗教的公民。据不完全统计，中国现有各种宗教信徒1亿多人，经登记的宗教活动场所8.5万余处，各种宗教教职人员约30万人，全国性和地方宗教团体3千多个，宗教院校74所。各教都自己出版经典、书刊，其中仅《圣经》的印数即达2000万册。中国各宗教团体已同世界70多个国家和地区的宗教组织、宗教人士建立了联系。在中国的人大、政协中，都有各种宗教信仰的人和各种社会团体与组织的人当选为代表、委员，当选为全国各级人民代表大会代表和政治协商会议委员的宗教界人士有17000余人。
The state protects the freedom of religious belief and the normal religious activities of citizens. No state organ, social organization or individual may compel citizens to believe in, or not to believe in, a religion, nor may they discriminate against citizens who believe in, or do not believe in, any religion. Incomplete statistics show that China now has more than 100 million religious believers and 85,000 venues for religious activities that have been registered, with some 300,000 professional religious personnel. There are more than 3,000 national and local religious organizations and 74 religious colleges. Various religions publish their scriptures, and religious books and journals. Of them, 20 million copies of the Bible have been printed. Chinese religious organizations have established contacts with religious organizations and personnel in more than 70 countries and regions. Both the NPC and CPPCC include people who have religious beliefs and who come from various social groups and organizations. More than 17,000 religious personnel have been elected deputies to the people's congresses and members of the people's political consultative conferences at various levels.
公安、司法机关依法打击犯罪，保护公民的合法权利不受侵犯。据统计，1998年，全国各级法院共审理各类一审案件540万件，其中刑事案件48万件，民事案件337万件，经济纠纷案件145万件，行政案件近10万件。公安、司法机关依法打击杀人、爆炸、投毒、抢劫、重大盗窃、强奸、绑架和黑社会性质组织犯罪、涉枪犯罪等严重刑事犯罪活动，有力保障人民群众的生命和财产安全；同时，依法维护犯罪嫌疑人和被告人的合法权利，1983年以来，人民法院对证据不足不构成犯罪的，依法宣告无罪4万余人。
Public security and judicial organs crack down on crimes according to law, and protect citizens' legitimate rights and interests from being infringed. According to statistics, in 1998, however, they handled 5.4 million first instance cases, including 480,000 criminal cases, 3.37 million civil cases, 1.45 million cases of economic disputes and nearly 100,000 administrative cases. The public security and judicial organs cracked down on serious crimes related to murder, explosion, poisoning, robbery, large-scale theft, rape, kidnapping, gangs, and guns, effectively protecting the safety of people's lives and property. Meanwhile, the legitimate rights of criminal suspects and the accused were protected according to law. Since 1983, people's courts have pronounced more than 40,000 people not guilty according to law because of lack of evidence of crimes.
 　　近年来，为严格执法，加强在司法各个环节中对人权的保护，人民法院深入开展审判方式改革，全面推进依法公开审判，强化对审判的社会和舆论监督，确保司法公正。一审案件除法律规定不公开审理以外，一律实行公开审理，二审案件也逐步提高了开庭率；对公开审理或者不公开审理的案件，一律公开宣判；开庭审理案件实行当庭举证、质证、认证、辩论，提高当庭宣判率。检察机关加大执法监督力度，依法纠正有法不依、执法不严、司法不公等问题。1998年，全国检察机关对应当立案侦查的案件而没有立案的，依法要求公安机关说明不立案理由9335件，通知立案5207件；对超期羁押的情况提出纠正意见70992人次；对侦查活动中的违法情况提出纠正意见9964件；受理公安、国家安全机关移送审查批捕的犯罪嫌疑人689025人，审结批准逮捕582120人，依法追捕6957人，作出不批准逮捕决定93218人；受理移送起诉犯罪嫌疑人668425人，审结提起公诉557929人，依法追诉3094人，作出不起诉决定11225人；对认为确有错误的刑事判决裁定提出抗诉3791件，对审判活动中的违法情况提出纠正意见1211件次；对有关部门办理减刑、假释、暂予监外执行中的违法情况，提出纠正意见9672件次。监狱机关坚持依法治监，大力推行狱务公开，增强执法透明度，切实保障罪犯的合法权利。据统计，1998年，全国监狱减刑、假释罪犯36.1万人，占押犯总数的25%。
Over the past few years, in a bid to strictly enforce laws and strengthen the protection of human rights during the judicial process, people's courts have carried out an in-depth reform of adjudication methods. Efforts have been made according to law to promote public adjudication in an all-round way, and strengthen the supervision of adjudication by society and public opinion so as to ensure judicial fairness. Except for those unsuitable for public hearing as prescribed by the law, all first instance cases are now subject to public trial. The rate of open court sessions for second instance cases has also been raised gradually. Judgments in all cases, whether subject to public hearing or not, are announced openly. While court sessions are opened for case hearing, evidence, cross-examination, attestation and debate have been conducted on the spot, thus increasing the rate of judgment announcements in court. Procuratorial organs have intensified the supervision of law enforcement by redressing according to law the problems of failure to observe the law, weak law enforcement and miscarriages of justice. In 1998, the procuratorial organs demanded that public security organs give reasons as to why 9,335 cases had not been filed, of which 5,207 cases were finally designated to be placed on file. They put forward suggestions for correcting the extended detention of 70,992 people, and raised for correction 9,964 cases which involved violation of the law during investigation. They approved the arrest of 582,120 of the 689,025 suspects transferred by public security and state security organs for examination and approval of arrest, and issued additional warrants for the arrest of 6,957 people and the prosecution of 3,094 people. They filed public charges against 557,929 of the 668,425 suspects transferred for approval of prosecution, and decided not to arrest 93,218 people and not to prosecute 11,225 people. They challenged 3,791 criminal judgments they deemed wrong, and raised 1,211 cases for correction, which involved violations of the law in the trial procedure. They also raised 9,672 cases for correction, which involved violations of the law by related departments for approving the reduction of a sentence term, release on parole, and temporary serving of sentences outside the prison. Prison authorities insist on administering prisons according to law. They have devoted great efforts to carrying out the practice of making public prison affairs to inmates, raising the transparency of law enforcement and conscientiously guaranteeing the legitimate rights of convicts. Statistics show that in 1998, some 361,000 convicts were given reductions of sentence or released on parole, accounting for 25 percent of the total imprisoned population.
 　　律师制度和法律援助制度的健全和发展，对于依法保护公民的合法权益不受侵犯，维护法律的正确实施，发挥着越来越重要的作用。目前全国已有律师事务所近9000家，执业律师10万多人。从1979年至1999年全国律师共办理刑事辩护案件300万件，其中仅1998年律师办理刑事辩护案件和代理就达296668件，有效地维护了犯罪嫌疑人和被告人的合法权益。1996年和1997年司法部法律援助中心和中国法律援助基金会正式成立以来，已建立法律援助机构800多个，越来越多的贫困公民依法享受到了减免费用的法律服务。据不完全统计，1997年，全国各级法律援助机构和各类法律服务人员共办理法律援助案件约5万件，解答法律咨询40多万人次；1998年，据20个省、市的不完全统计，共办理法律援助案件6万多件，解答法律咨询80余万人次；1999年上半年，据对24个省的不完全统计，共办理各类法律援助案件4万多件。
The establishment and development of the lawyer and legal aid systems are playing an increasingly important role in protecting the legitimate rights and interests of citizens, and maintaining the correct enforcement of the law. Currently, China has nearly 9,000 law offices, and the number of licensed lawyers exceeds 100,000. Between 1979 and 1999, lawyers in China pleaded for the accused in three million criminal cases. In 1998 alone, they pleaded for the accused or acted as attorneys in 296,668 criminal cases. As a result, the legitimate rights and interests of the suspects and accused were effectively safeguarded. Since the Legal Aid Center of the Ministry of Justice and the China Legal Aid Foundation were established in 1996 and 1997, respectively, more than 800 legal aid institutions have been set up. This enables an increasing number of poor citizens to benefit from legal services free or at a reduced charge, according to law. Incomplete statistics indicate that in 1997, legal aid institutions at various levels and personnel engaged in legal services handled some 50,000 cases requiring legal aid, and provided legal advice to more than 400,000 people. According to 1998 statistics, such institutions and personnel in 20 provinces and municipalities handled more than 60,000 cases requesting legal aid, and offered legal advice to 800,000 people. And another survey shows that in the first half of 1999, more than 40,000 such cases were handled in 24 provinces.
 　　公民对国家机关及其工作人员有提出批评和建议的权利，对其违法失职行为有提出申诉、控告或检举的权利。为了保障公民的申诉、控告、检举权，各级各类国家机关都普遍设立了信访机构，人民检察机关和行政监察系统从中央到地方普遍设立了对违法犯罪行为的举报机构。新闻传媒对国家工作人员渎职、滥用职权和侵犯公民合法权益行为的舆论监督大大加强。由于国家机关和国家工作人员侵犯公民权利而受到损失的人，有依照法律规定取得赔偿的权利。中国于1991年和1995年专门制定了《行政诉讼法》和《国家赔偿法》，迄今人民法院共审理各类行政案件近44万件，办理国家赔偿案件2566件，有力地维护了公民的合法权益。
     Citizens have the right to criticize and make suggestions to government institutions and their staff members. They also have the right to complain, bring lawsuits against or report law-breaking activities and dereliction of duty on the part of government officials. To guarantee these rights of citizens, government institutions at all levels have set up offices receiving petitions and personal visits. And the people's procuratorial organs and administrative supervisory systems at central to local levels have established offence-reporting organs. The news media have also strengthened supervision of cases involving dereliction of duty, abuse of power and infringement of citizens' legitimate rights and interests by government functionaries. Those who have suffered losses due to the infringement of citizens' rights by state organs or government functionaries, have the right to compensation according to law. China specially formulated the Administrative Procedure Law in 1991 and the State Compensation Law in 1995. To date, nearly 440,000 administrative cases and 2,566 state compensation cases have been handled by people's courts, effectively safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of citizens.
妇女、儿童权利的保护
      Protection of the Rights of Women and Children
在旧中国，妇女根本没有参政的权利。
In old China, women did not have any right at all to participate in public affairs.
新中国成立后，妇女参与管理国家和社会事务的权利依法受到保障，参政水平不断提高。
since the establishment of the PRC in 1949, women's right to participate in the administration of state and social affairs has been protected according to law, with the level of their involvement in public affairs rising constantly.

在旧中国，妇女就业机会很少。
In old China, women had few employment opportunities. 
如今，妇女依法享有与男子平等的劳动就业权利，并享有同工同酬和受特殊劳动保护的权利。
Today, women enjoy equal rights with men to work, as well as the right to acquire equal pay for equal work and special labor protection. 

在旧中国，妇女90%是文盲，如今妇女文盲比例已降到了1997年的23.2%，其中女性青壮年文盲率已降至8.5%。
In old China, 90 percent of women were illiterate, whereas in 1997, the female illiteracy rate dropped to 23.2 percent, with the illiteracy rate for young and middle-aged women down to 8.5 percent.

妇女的健康状况大大改善。
The physical conditions of women have greatly improved. 
中国采取切实措施，发展儿童卫生保健事业，保障儿童的生命健康。
China has adopted practical measures to develop hygienic and health care undertakings for children, protecting the life and health of children.
儿童接受早期教育的水平迅速提高。
Early education for children has improved rapidly in China.

少数民族的平等权利和特殊保护
      Equal Rights and Special Protection for Ethnic Minorities

新中国成立后，少数民族人民同汉族人民一样成为国家的主人，平等地享有宪法和法律赋予的全部公民权利，同时还依法享有少数民族特有的权利。
Since the founding of the PRC, ethnic minorities, along with the majority Han ethnic group, have been the masters of the state, equally enjoying all of the civil rights granted by the Constitution and laws, and in addition enjoying the special rights of ethnic minorities according to law.
 　　各少数民族平等参与管理国家的权利得到充分保障。
The right of the ethnic minorities to participate on an equal footing in state administration is guaranteed. 
在历届全国人大和全国政协中，少数民族代表和委员所占的百分比，都超过了少数民族在全国人口中所占的比例。在1998年选出的第九届全国人民代表大会中少数民族代表占14.37%，在第九届全国政治协商会议中少数民族委员占11.7%，均大大超过少数民族占全国人口8.9%的比例；55个少数民族都有自己的代表和委员。目前，全国共有少数民族干部270多万人，在中央和地方国家权力机关和行政机关、审判机关、检察机关都有相当数量的少数民族工作人员。
In the NPC and the CPPCC National Committees of the successive terms, the percentage of ethnic minority deputies and members has exceeded the proportion of the ethnic minority population in the national population. Ethnic-minority deputies accounted for 14.37 percent of the Ninth NPC deputies selected in 1998, and for 11.7 percent of the members of the Ninth National Committee of the CPPCC, both surpassing the 8.9 percent proportion of the ethnic minority population in the national population. Each of the 55 ethnic minorities has its own NPC deputies and CPPCC National Committee members. There are over 2.7 million ethnic-minority cadres throughout China, and a fairly large number of ethnic-minority personnel working in central and local state organs, administrative organs, judicial organs and procuratorial organs.
 　　中国在少数民族聚居地区实行民族区域自治制度。
China practices ethnic regional autonomy in areas where minority peoples live in compact communities. 
根据法律规定，各民族自治地方的人民代表大会常务委员会由实行区域自治的民族的公民担任主任或副主任，各自治区主席、自治州州长、自治县县长由实行区域自治的民族的公民担任。自治区、自治州、自治县的人民政府的其他组成人员，也都要尽量配备实行区域自治的民族和其他少数民族的人员。自治地方的人民代表大会有权依照当地民族的政治、经济和文化特点，制定自治条例和单行条例。截止到1998年底，民族自治地方共制定自治条例126个，单行条例209个。民族区域自治地方依法有权在报经上级国家机关批准后，变通执行、停止执行不适合民族自治地方实际情况的上级国家机关的决议、决定、命令和指示。民族区域自治地方还依法享有经济自主权、财政自主权、自主发展教育科技文化的权利和使用、发展民族语言文字的权利。
According to the relevant laws, among the chairman or vice-chairmen of the standing committee of the people's congress of an autonomous area there must be one or more citizens of the ethnic group or groups exercising regional autonomy in the area concerned. The head of an autonomous region, autonomous prefecture or autonomous county shall be a citizen of the ethnic group exercising regional autonomy in the area concerned, and the other members of the people's governments of these regions, prefectures and counties shall include members of the ethnic group exercising regional autonomy as well as members of other ethnic minorities as far as possible. The people's congresses of the autonomous areas have the right to enact regulations on the exercise of autonomy and separate regulations in light of local political, economic and cultural characteristics. By the end of 1998, 126 regulations on the exercise of autonomy and 209 separate regulations had been enacted by the autonomous areas. If resolutions, decisions, orders and instructions from the higher-level state organs are not suited to the actual conditions of the autonomous areas, the organs of self-government of these areas may be flexible in carrying them out or may decide not to carry them out after gaining approval from the higher state organs. Furthermore, in accordance with state laws and regulations, organs of self-government in autonomous areas also enjoy the right to control their economies and local finances, the right to develop educational, scientific, technological and cultural undertakings, and the right to use and develop the local spoken and written languages.

1949年前，少数民族地区的经济文化和社会发展极为落后，大多数民族地区主要从事农牧业生产，少数民族的生活极端贫困。
Before the founding of the People's Republic in 1949, economy, culture and social development were very backward in its ethnic minority areas. People of ethnic minorities mainly engaged in agriculture and animal husbandry and lived in poverty. 
新中国成立后，国家采取特殊政策和措施，对少数民族地区的经济从资金、技术、人才等方面给予支援和扶持，促进了少数民族地区的经济发展和社会进步。据统计，1998年，民族自治地方的工农业总产值已由1949年的36.6亿元增加到8523.5亿元。1998年，民族自治地方的生铁、原煤、原油产量、发电量分别由1952年的0.9万吨、178万吨、5.2万吨和0.8亿千瓦小时提高到701.73万吨、17568.6万吨、2047.24万吨和1321.1亿千瓦小时。1998年，民族自治地方的铁路、公路通车里程和邮路总长度分别达到1.71万公里、37.64万公里和113.54万公里，分别是1952年的4.5倍、12.8倍和8.6倍；粮食产量由1581.5万吨增加到7150万吨，大牲畜由2439.2万头增加到5564.7万头。少数民族人民的生活得到了巨大的改善。1997年，全国民族自治地方农民人均纯收入1633.11元，是1980年的21.5倍；人均占有粮食424.4公斤，是1978年的l.5倍；全国民族自治地方从业人员平均工资达到5593元，比1981年增长6.9倍。
Since 1949, the state has adopted special policies and measures to assist and support the economic development and social progress of the ethnic minority areas in the aspects of capital, technology and personnel. According to statistics, the total industrial and agricultural output value in autonomous areas grew from 3.66 billion RMB yuan in 1949 to 852.35 billion RMB yuan in 1998. The output of pig iron, raw coal, crude oil and generated energy in these areas increased respectively from 9,000 tons, 1.78 million tons, 52,000 tons and 80 million kilowatt-hour in 1952 to 7.0173 million tons, 175.686 million tons, 20.4724 million tons and 132.11 billion kilowatt-hour in 1998. The railway traffic mileage, highway traffic mileage and postal routes totaled respectively 17,100 kilometers, 376,400 kilometers and 1.1354 million kilometers, or 4.5 times, 12.8 times and 8.6 times the 1952 figures, respectively. The grain output grew from 15.815 million tons in 1952 to 71.5 million tons in 1998, and the total number of large livestock from 24.392 million head to 55.647 million head. Remarkable improvements have been made in the lives of the ethnic minority peoples. In 1997 in ethnic-minority autonomous areas, the net income per peasant had reached 1,633.11 RMB yuan, or 21.5 times the 1980 figure; the per capita possession of grain came to 424.4 kilograms, or 1.5 times the 1978 figure; and the average annual salaries of employees amounted to 5,593 RMB yuan, or 7.9 times the 1981 figure.
在旧中国，少数民族文盲率在95%以上。
In old China, the illiteracy rate among ethnic minorities was often over 95 percent. 
宁夏学龄儿童入学率只有10%，西藏97%的人口是文盲，内蒙古只有16所中学。新中国成立后，少数民族地区的受教育状况得到了根本的改善，少数民族人口文盲率下降约68个百分点。到1998年，全国少数民族自治地区有普通高等学校94所，在校生22.64万人；中学13466 所，在校生529.64万人；小学90704 所，在校生1240.9万人。目前，中国独立设置的民族院校有民族大学和民族学院12所，民族师范学校59所，民族职业中学158所，民族中学3536所，民族小学20906所。1990年以来，民族聚居地区的入学率与全国平均水平的差距由3.7个百分点下降至0.7个百分点。
Only 10 percent of school-age children attended school in Ningxia, 97 percent of the people in Tibet were illiterate, and there were only 16 secondary schools in Inner Mongolia. Since the founding of the People's Republic, the educational situation in ethnic-minority areas has been improved remarkably, and the illiteracy rate has been reduced by 68 percentage points. By 1998 in ethnic autonomous areas, there were 94 institutions of higher learning with 226,400 students, 13,466 middle schools with 5.2964 million students, and 90,704 primary schools with 12.409 million pupils. To date, the state has independently founded 12 specialized ethnic universities and institutes, 59 ethnic teachers' training schools, 158 ethnic secondary vocational schools, 3,536 ethnic middle schools, and 20,906 ethnic primary schools. Since 1990, the gap between the school attendance rate in the areas inhabited by minority peoples and the average national level has been reduced from 3.7 percentage points to 0.7 percentage point.
 　　少数民族的优秀传统文化受到保护。
The fine traditional cultures of ethnic minorities are being preserved. 
中国法律规定，各民族都有使用和发展自己语言文字的自由。
Chinese law provides that all ethnic groups have the freedom to use and develop their own spoken and written languages. 
民族自治地方的自治机关在执行职务的时候，使用当地通用的一种或几种文字；同时使用几种通用的语言文字执行职务的，可以以实行区域自治的民族的语言文字为主。从50年代开始，中国政府先后帮助十多个少数民族创制或改进了13种民族文字。国家成立专门机构组织和领导全国少数民族古籍整理工作，现已搜集少数民族古籍12万余种，整理11万余种，出版古籍书籍5000余种。国家组织3000多名专家学者，完成了民族问题五种丛书的编辑出版工作，其中，包括中国少数民族简史、少数民族语言简志、民族自治地方概况等丛书400多种，9000多万字。中国55个少数民族都有了文字记载的简史。中国政府设立专门工作机构，负责收集、整理、翻译、研究少数民族三大英雄史诗《格萨尔》、《江格尔》、《玛纳斯》，出版了三大史诗的民族文字版本、汉文和多种外国文字版本，并出版了一些研究专著。
The organs of self-government in ethnic autonomous areas all use one or more languages of their areas to carry out their responsibilities. When several languages are current, they may mainly adopt the language of the ethnic minority exercising the regional autonomy. Since the 1950s, the Chinese government has helped a dozen minority peoples create or improve 13 scripts. The state has established special bodies to organize the editing and publishing of ancient writings of ethnic minorities. More than 120,000 titles of such works have been collected, of which over 110,000 have been edited and 5,000 published. More than 3,000 experts and scholars organized by the state have completed the editing and publishing of five series of books on ethnic minority issues, includingA Brief History of China's Ethnic Minorities,Brief Records of Ethnic Minorities' LanguagesandA General Survey of Ethnic Minority Autonomous Areas, comprising over 400 titles with 90 million words. Now each of the 55 ethnic minority groups has a brief written history. The Chinese government has set up special institutions for the preservation, translation and research of the three major epics of ethnic minorities:Gesar,JianggarandManas. The three epics and treatises concerning them have been published in the appropriate ethnic minority languages, in Chinese and in other languages.
 　　国家尊重少数民族饮食、丧葬、年节、婚姻等风俗习惯，尊重少数民族享有宗教信仰自由，并在各方面给予特殊的政策和照顾。
The state respects the folkways and customs of minority peoples in such aspects as diet, burial, festivals and marriage. Minority peoples also enjoy freedom of religious belief, supported by specific state policies.
目前，信仰伊斯兰教的少数民族群众有1800多万，清真寺3万余座，伊玛目、阿訇4万余人。其中新疆信教群众有810多万，占全新疆总人口的56.3%以上，有宗教活动场所2.3万座，其中清真寺2万多座，宗教教职人员2.9万多人，宗教团体80多个。在西藏，藏传佛教有各类宗教活动场所1700多处，住寺僧尼4.6万多人。
To date, there are more than 18 million believers in Islam among ethnic minorities, over 30,000 mosques and 40,000 imams and ahungs. The Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region has more than 8.1 million religious believers, accounting for over 56.3 percent of its total population, 23,000 places for religious activities (over 20,000 mosques included), 29,000 religious personnel and over 80 religious groups. In Tibet, there are more than 1,700 places for Tibetan Buddhist activities, and 46,000 lamas and monks.

在旧中国，少数民族医疗卫生状况十分落后，地方病、传染病流行蔓延，人口锐减。
In old China, the medical and health conditions in ethnic minority areas were extremely backward. Endemic and epidemic diseases ran rampant, and the population declined steadily.
新中国成立后，少数民族地区的医疗卫生状况得到巨大改善，人口增长很快，健康水平大幅度提高。
 Since the founding of New China, medical and health conditions in such areas have been remarkably improved, the populations have increased rapidly and the standard of health has risen greatly. 
据统计，1998年，全国民族自治地方的医疗卫生机构已由1949年的361个增加到16724 家，病床由3310张增加到392671张，卫生技术人员由3531名增加到605255名。1998年，仅西藏自治区就有卫生机构1300多个，比1959年增加20倍；医院床位6700多张，比1959年增加16.6倍。1953年全国第一次人口普查时，少数民族人口只有3401.3万，而据1995年1%抽样调查统计，全国少数民族人口已达到1.0846亿人。少数民族地区的人口死亡率和婴儿死亡率持续下降。以西藏自治区为例，与1959年相比，1998年西藏孕产妇死亡率由50‰下降到7‰左右，婴儿死亡率由430‰下降到36.77‰。西藏人口平均预期寿命已由1949年前的36岁延长到目前的65岁左右。
According to statistics, medical and health institutions in ethnic autonomous areas grew from 361 in 1949 to 16,724 in 1998, the number of hospital beds grew from 3,310 to 392,671 and the number of medical personnel from 3,531 to 605,255. In 1998, the Tibet Autonomous Region had more than 1,300 medical and health institutions, or 21 times the 1959 figure, and over 6,700 hospital beds, or 17.6 times the 1959 figure. The population of ethnic minorities in China was only 34.013 million according to the first national census of 1953, but it had reached 108.46 million according to a one percent sampling survey in 1995. In the ethnic minority areas, both the death rate of the people in general and the mortality rate of infants keep going down. For example, in the Tibet Autonomous Region the mortality rate of women in pregnancy and childbirth decreased from five percent in 1959 to 0.7 percent in 1998, and the infant mortality rate from 43 percent in 1959 to 3.677 percent in 1998. Meanwhile, the average life expectancy of the people in Tibet has been prolonged from 36 years before 1949 to the current 65 years.
中国人权的跨世纪发展前景
      The Cross-Century Development Prospects for Human Rights in China
50年在人类历史的长河中只是一瞬间，但是，中国人民在50年中实现了人权发展的伟大的历史性飞跃。
Fifty years is but a moment in human history. Nevertheless, in the past 50 years the Chinese people have made a great historic leap in the development of human rights.
尽管在维护和促进人权的过程中遇到过曲折，但是，一个不容争辩的基本事实是：经过半个世纪的不懈努力，一个积弱积贫、备受屈辱的旧中国已经变成了一个独立自主、初步繁荣昌盛的新中国，12.5亿中国人民主宰了自己的命运，告别了饥寒交迫、愚昧无知状态，甩掉了“东亚病夫”的帽子，过上了丰衣足食、文明健康的美好生活，享受着前所未有的民主自由。
In safeguarding and promoting human rights, although setbacks occurred, one indisputable basic fact is that after unremitting efforts over half a century, the poverty-stricken, weak and humiliated old China has become an independent New China in the early stage of prosperity, and the 1.25 billion Chinese people have become the masters of their own destiny. They have changed the terrible situation of chronic hunger, cold and ignorance, rid China of the label of "The Sick Man of East Asia," lead a civilized and healthy life of plenty, and enjoy unprecedented democracy and freedom.
可以说，今日中国的人权状况，不仅与旧中国相比有了天壤之别，而且与改革开放之前相比也取得了举世公认的巨大进步。
We can say that the human rights situation in present-day China is totally different from that of the old China-even compared with the years before the initiation of reform and opening-up, the great progress that has been made in this respect is universally acknowledged.
 　　毋庸讳言，中国还是一个发展中国家，受自然、历史和经济发展水平的影响和制约，国家的民主法制建设、社会的文明程度和人民的生活水平都还需要进一步改善。但是，有了50年发展的基础，特别是有了改革开放20年的成功经验，中国政府和人民完全能够解决前进道路中遇到的问题，使人权事业不断向前发展。
Nevertheless, it must be admitted that China is still a developing country. Limited by impediments of natural, historical and economic development, there is still room for improvement with regard to the levels of China's democracy and legal system building, the degree of social civilization and people's living standards. However, on the basis of 50 years of development, especially with the successful experiences accumulated in the past 20 years of reform and opening-up, the Chinese government and people are capable of solving the problems on the road of advance, and will make constant progress in their endeavors to improve human rights.
 　　第一，实现充分的人权是中国跨世纪发展的基本目标。改革开放后，中国制定的实现现代化三步走的跨世纪经济发展战略，每一步都立足于国力的增强和人民生活水平的提高，并最终落实到人权改善的目标上。第一步和第二步即基本解决全国人民的温饱问题和使全国人民的生活水平达到小康已经基本实现；第三步即到21世纪中叶达到中等发达国家的水平，使全国人民实现共同富裕，已经有了较好的基础。1997年召开的中共十五大在总结经验的基础上，从国家跨世纪发展的高度，在重申三步走发展战略的同时，将民主法制建设摆到了一个突出的地位，强调要继续推进政治体制改革，进一步扩大民主，健全法制，“依法治国，建设社会主义法治国家”，并将依法治国确立为基本的治国方略。1999年3月，第九届全国人民代表大会第二次会议进一步将“依法治国，建设社会主义法治国家”写入宪法，从而将依法治国、建设法治国家作为政治体制改革和民主法制建设的基本目标，以国家根本大法的形式固定下来。依法治国、建设法治国家的实质，就是要确保党和政府依法执政和依法行政，执法司法部门依法办事，公民依法行使权利和履行义务，一句话，就是要从法律和制度上保障人权。因此，依法治国方略的实施和建设法治国家的目标的实现，对于切实保障人权，推进中国人权的跨世纪发展，具有重大的实质性意义。
First, to fully realize human rights is a basic goal of China's cross-century development. After China adopted the policy of reform and opening-up, it has worked out a cross-century economic development strategy to realize modernization in three stages, each stage being aimed at enhancing China's overall national strength and improving the Chinese people's living standards. This inevitably entails improving the human rights situation. The goals of the first and second stages-to solve the problems of food and clothing of the entire Chinese people and to enable them to live a relatively comfortable life-have already been basically achieved; the goal of the third stage-to reach the level of the medium-developed countries in the mid-21st century, so that the entire Chinese people can realize common prosperity-already has a relatively good foundation. At the 15th National Congress of the CPC held in 1997, on the basis of summing up experiences, and from the height of China's cross-century development, while reiterating the three-stage development strategy, emphasis was placed on democracy and legal system building. The congress stressed the continuance of the reform of the political system, the further expansion of democracy, the perfection of the legal system, and making "exercising the rule of law" a basic state policy. In March 1999, the Second Session of the Ninth NPC included "exercising the rule of law and building a socialist country governed according to law" in the Constitution, making "exercising the rule of law and building a country governed according to law" a basic goal of the reform of the political system and the democracy and legal system building, which is fixed in the form of the fundamental law of the state. The essence of this goal is guaranteeing that the Party and the government control political power and administer the state according to law, that the law-enforcement departments work in accordance with the law, and that the citizens exercise their rights and perform their duties in accordance with the law. In short, we must guarantee human rights in the country's laws and systems. Therefore, the implementation of the strategy of exercising the rule of law and the realization of the goal of building a country governed according to law possess important and essential significance in guaranteeing human rights and promoting China's cross-century development of human rights.
 　　第二，改革开放以来中国找到了一条适合自己国情的促进和发展人权的道路。中国是一个历史悠久、人口众多、资源和财富相对短缺的东方发展中国家。在这样一个国家促进人权，既不能照搬西方发达国家的人权发展模式，也不能因袭其他发展中国家的做法，只能从中国的国情出发，探索具有自身特点的发展道路。改革开放以后，中国在总结历史经验和教训的基础上，找到了一条建设有中国特色社会主义的发展道路，从而也就找到了一条真正符合中国国情的促进和发展人权的道路。这就是：将生存权、发展权放在首位，在改革、发展、稳定的条件下，全面推进人权。这条道路的特点是：在发展人权的基本方向上，坚持发展生产力和共同富裕的原则，立足于改善全国人民的生活和促进全国人民人权的发展；在促进人权的轻重缓急上，强调生存权、发展权的首要地位，同时兼顾公民的政治、经济、社会、文化权利和个人、集体权利的全面发展；在促进和保障人权的方式方法上，强调稳定是前提，发展是关键，改革是动力，法治是保障。20多年来，由于中国坚持了这条正确的发展道路，不仅使全国人民的生活状况和精神风貌大为改观，而且形成了一整套比较完备的保障人民民主权利的政治制度和法律体系，从而使人权建设在制度化、法律化的轨道上取得了长足的进展，人权状况呈现出不断改善的良好态势。实践证明，建设有中国特色社会主义是一条符合中国人民根本利益的发展道路，也是一条促进中国人权的行之有效的必由之路。
Second, since China introduced the policy of reform and opening-up, it has found a road for the promotion and development of human rights that suits its reality. China is a developing country in the East with a long history and a huge population, but with a relative shortage of resources and wealth. To promote human rights in such a country, China cannot copy the mode of human rights development of the developed Western countries, nor can it copy the methods of other developing countries. China can only start from its own reality and explore a road with its own characteristics. Since the introduction of the policy of reform and opening-up, China has, on the basis of summing up its historical experiences and drawing lessons from them, found a road to building socialism with Chinese characteristics, and therefore has found a road to promoting and developing human rights which is in line with the country's reality. This means putting the rights to subsistence and development in the first place, under the conditions of reform, development and stability, and thus promoting human rights development in an overall way. The characteristics of this road are, in terms of the basic orientation of developing human rights, that we stick to the principle of developing the productive forces and promoting common prosperity, based on the improvement of the living standards of the entire people and promoting the human rights of the entire people; in terms of the order of priority, the top priority is given to the rights to subsistence and development, while taking into consideration the people's political, economic, social and cultural rights and the overall development of individual and collective rights; in terms of the methods of promoting and guaranteeing human rights, we stress that stability is the prerequisite, development is the key, reform is the motive power, and government according to law is the guarantee. Over the past 20 years, China has stuck to this correct road of development. As a result, not only have the living standards and mental outlook of the Chinese people changed greatly, but a set of relatively complete political and legal systems that guarantee the people's democratic rights have been formed. Thus, great progress has been made in putting human rights into a legal and institutional framework, and China's human rights development has been improving constantly. Practice has proved that building socialism with Chinese characteristics is a road of development that is in accordance with the fundamental interests of the Chinese people, and also the only road which can effectively promote human rights in China.

可以说，中国人权跨世纪发展的目标已经明确，基础已经奠定，道路已经开通。
We can say that China's cross-century development objective in the sphere of human rights has been set, the foundation has been laid, and the road has been opened.
展望21世纪，我们完全有理由相信，只要按照党的十五大的部署，在继续实现三步走经济发展战略的同时，认真落实依法治国的方略，努力建设社会主义法治国家，中国的人权状况就将不断地得到改善。
 Looking forward to the 21st century, we have every reason to believe that China's human rights situation will see unwavering improvement, as long as we follow the plans laid down at the 15th National Congress of the CPC, and while continuing to carry out the three-stage economic development strategy, earnestly implement the general plan of exercising the rule of law and strive to build a socialist country governed according to law.　　
2000年中国人权事业的进展
Progress in China's Human Rights Cause in 2000

中华人民共和国 国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China

二00一年四月?北京
April 9, 2001, Beijing

目　　录
Contents

前　　言
Foreword 

人民生存权和发展权的改善
The Improvement of the People's Rights to Subsistence and Development

公民政治权利的保障
 The Guarantee of Citizens' Political Rights

人权的司法保障
 Judicial Guarantee for Human Rights
    
公民的经济、社会和文化权利
 The Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of Citizens
    
妇女、儿童权利的保护
 Protection of Women and Children's Rights
    
少数民族的平等权利和特殊保护
 Equal Rights and Special Protection for Ethnic Minorities
    
积极开展人权领域的对外交流与合作  
 Actively Carrying Out International Exchanges and Cooperation in the Realm of Human Rights　　
2000年是中国现代化发展进程中具有标志意义的一年，也是中国人权事业继续取得进展的一年。在这一年，国民经济和社会发展第九个五年计划顺利完成，西部大开发取得良好开端，社会经济健康发展，民主法制建设继续加强，人权状况保持了良好发展态势。
The year 2000 was a year of milestone-like significance in the course of China's development along modern lines, and also a year that witnessed continued advance in China's human rights cause. In 2000, the Ninth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development was successfully completed, the development of the western region got off to a good start, the economy developed in a healthy way, the democratic and legal systems were continuously strengthened, and the human rights situation maintained a good momentum of development.

人民生存权和发展权的改善
The Improvement of the People's Rights to Subsistence and Development
中国政府继续把维护和促进人民的生存权和发展权置于首位，大力发展经济，增强综合国力，改善人民的生存和发展状况。2000年，中国完全摆脱了亚洲金融危机的影响，国民经济开始扭转下滑趋势，增长率明显提高，国内生产总值达到89404亿元，首次突破1万亿美元，比上年增长8.0%；人均国内生产总值超过800美元，超额完成了人均国民生产总值比1980年翻两番的任务，顺利实现了现代化发展的第二步战略目标。全年进出口总额达4743亿美元，比上年增长31.5%；年末国家外汇储备达1656亿美元，比年初增加109亿美元。目前，国内生产总值已由七十年代的居世界第十一位上升到第七位，进出口总额和外汇储备分别由七十年代的居世界第三十二位和第三十九位跃居第八位和第二位。钢铁、煤炭、水泥、化肥、电视机、谷物、棉花、肉类、水产品等主要工农业产品产量已居世界首位，商品供应丰富，有效供给能力大幅提高。
The Chinese government continued to put the safeguarding and promotion of the people's rights to subsistence and development on the top of its agenda, and spared no effort to develop the economy, enhance the comprehensive national strength and improve the people's access to subsistence and development. In 2000, China rid itself completely of the influence of the Asian financial crisis, the national economy began to reverse the sliding trend, the growth rate obviously went up, and the GDP reached 8,940.4 billion yuan, breaking through the US $1,000 billion mark for the first time, marking an increase of 8.0 percent over the figure for the previous year. At the same time, the GDP per capita exceeded US$ 800, overfulfilling the task of quadrupling 1980's GNP per capita, and successfully realizing the second-step strategic objectives of the modernization drive. In 2000, China's overall import and export volume reached US$ 474.3 billion-worth, or an increase of 31.5 percent over that of the previous year. At the end of 2000, the state foreign exchange reserve reached US$ 165.6 billion, or an increase of US$ 10.9 billion over that at the beginning of 2000. To date, China's GDP has increased from the 11th in world ranking in the 1970s to the seventh. In the 1970s, the total import and export volume and foreign exchange reserve ranked 32nd and 39th, respectively, in the world, but now they rank eighth and second, respectively. China ranks first in the world in the output of major industrial and agricultural products, such as iron and steel, coal, cement, chemical fertilizer, TV sets, grain, cotton, meat and aquatic products. With sufficient commodities, China's effective supply ability has been greatly improved.
城乡居民收入稳定增长，生活水平继续提高，全国人民总体上实现了由温饱向小康的跨越。2000年，城镇居民人均可支配收入6280元，比上年实际增长6.4%；农村居民人均纯收入2253元，比上年实际增长2.1%。“九五”期间（1996年至2000年），居民储蓄存款余额5年增长1倍多。到2000年，居民储蓄总额突破6.4万亿元，比8年前增加4倍多。居民消费水平不断提高，社会消费品零售总额“九五”期间平均每年增长10.6%。
The income of urban and rural residents has gone up steadily, and their standard of living has continued to improve. The Chinese people nationwide have jumped from the stage of having enough to eat and wear to that of living a better-off life. In 2000, the disposable income per urban resident came to 6,280 yuan, or an increase of 6.4 percent over that of the previous year, in real terms; the net income per rural resident reached 2,253 yuan, or a growth of 2.1 percent over that of the previous year, in real terms. During the Ninth Five-Year Plan period (1996-2000), savings deposits of urban and rural residents more than doubled, and by 2000 had topped 6,400 billion yuan, or an increase of more than five times compared to what it had been eight years previously. The consumption level has been constantly improved, and the average annual growth rate of the volume of total retail sales of consumer goods during the Ninth Five-Year Plan period reached 10.6 percent.
居民的消费结构趋于优化，衣、食和基本生活用品支出的比重大幅下降，住房、交通通信、医疗保健、文教娱乐等发展与享受需求的支出比重迅速上升。1999年，城乡居民衣食住用以外的消费支出占消费总支出的比重为29.3%和21.6%，分别比1995年提高8.2个百分点和6.2个百分点。城镇居民恩格尔系数（食品支出占消费支出的比重）2000年为40%左右，比1995年下降近10个百分点，比1978年下降约18个百分点；农村居民恩格尔系数2000年为50%左右，比1995年下降约8个百分点，比1954年下降约19个百分点。在食品构成中，粮食消费量有所减少，水产品、肉、禽、蛋、牛奶等动物性食品的消费量大幅度增加。目前，每百户城镇居民拥有彩电116.6台、洗衣机90.5台、冰箱86.7台、空调器30.8台，已接近发达国家水平；每百户农村居民拥有彩电38.24台、洗衣机24.32台、冰箱10.64台，分别比1995年增加21.32台、7.42台、5.49台。每百户城镇居民拥有家用电脑、家用摄像机、微波炉、影碟机由前几年的几乎空白状况分别提高到1999年的5.91台、1.06台、12台、25台。
The structure of consumption has been optimized: The proportion of the expenditure for clothes, food and daily necessities has decreased by a large margin, and the proportion of the expenditure for housing, communications and telecommunications, medical and health care, culture, education and recreation has gone up rapidly. In 1999, the consumption expenditure of urban and rural residents, excluding that for clothing, food, housing and daily necessities, made up 29.3 percent and 21.6 percent of their total consumption expenditure, respectively, or an increase of 8.2 percentage points and 6.2 percentage points, respectively, over the figures for 1995. In 2000, the Engel's coefficient of urban residents (the proportion of food expenditure in the total consumption expenditure) was about 40 percent, or a drop of close to 10 percentage points lower than that of 1995, and a decrease of 18 percentage points lower than that in 1978. Meanwhile, the Engel's coefficient of rural residents was about 50 percent, or a decrease of about 8 percentage points lower than that of 1995, and approximately 19 percentage points lower than that of 1954. As for food consumption, grain consumption has decreased, and that of aquatic products, meat, domestic fowls, eggs, milk and other foodstuffs related to domestic animals has increased substantially. At present, for every 100 urban households there are 116.6 color TV sets, 90.5 washing machines, 86.7 refrigerators, and 30.8 air-conditioners-close to the level of developed countries. For every 100 rural households there are 38.24 color TV sets, 24.32 washing machines and 10.64 refrigerators, increases of 21.32, 7.42 and 5.49, respectively, over the figures for 1995. Not so long ago, almost no Chinese family owned a household computer, video camera, microwave oven or VCD player. In 1999, however, for every 100 urban households there were 5.91 household computers, 1.06 video cameras, 12 microwave ovens and 25 VCD players.
居民住房条件继续改善。1999年，城镇居民人均居住面积由1995年的8.1平方米增加到9.8平方米；农村居民人均居住面积由1995年的21平方米提高到24.2平方米。2000年，全国城镇竣工住宅面积5.1亿平方米，农村竣工住宅面积8.5亿平方米，住房状况进一步改善。
Housing conditions have been continuously improved. The living space per urban resident increased from 8.1 sq m in 1995 to 9.8 sq m in 1999; and the living space per rural resident grew from 21 sq m to 24.2 sq m. In 2000, 510 million sq m of floor space of urban residential buildings were completed; and the construction of rural residential buildings totaling a floor space of 850 million sq m was completed. Hence, housing conditions have been further improved.
中国政府在普遍提高人民生活水平的同时，高度重视解决贫困人口的温饱问题。1979年改革开放以来，中国在全国范围内开展了有计划、有组织、大规模的扶贫开发工作，到2000年底，农村贫困发生率从1978年的30.7%下降到3%左右。全国592个国家重点扶持的贫困县的农民人均纯收入由1994年的648元提高到2000年的1348元。全国贫困地区以乡为单位的通公路率和通电率均达到97%以上，98%的乡镇有了卫生院。中国贫困人口温饱问题的基本解决、生活质量的大幅提高，与世界绝对贫困人口持续增加的情况形成了鲜明的对照。联合国开发计划署认为，中国扶贫开发的成就，“为发展中国家，甚至整个世界提供了一种模式”。
While improving the people's living standards across the board, the Chinese government has attached great importance to ensuring that poverty-stricken people have enough to eat and wear. Since the initiation of reform and opening-up in 1979, China has engaged in a large-scale, development-oriented aid-the-poor drive nationwide in a planned and organized way. By the end of 2000, the incidence rate of poverty in rural areas had dropped from 30.7 percent in 1978 to about 3 percent. The net income per farmer in the 592 poverty-stricken counties at the top of the state aid-the-poor agenda, increased from 648 yuan in 1994 to 1,348 yuan in 2000. More than 97 percent of the townships in the poverty-stricken areas nationwide are now accessible by bus and have electricity; and 98 percent of such townships have small hospitals. The problem of ensuring that the poverty-stricken people have enough to eat and wear has basically been solved, and their quality of life has been greatly improved, forming a striking contrast with the situation worldwide in which the absolutely poverty-stricken population keeps increasing. The UN Development Program holds that China's achievements in the development-oriented aid-the-poor work have provided a model for the developing countries, and even for the whole world.
人民的医疗保健和身体素质不断提高。2000年末，全国已有卫生机构（含诊所）32.5万个，床位318万张，卫生技术人员449万人。农村有医疗点的村数占总村数的89.8%，乡村医生和卫生员132万人。体育事业蓬勃发展，全民健身活动广泛开展，国民身体素质普遍提高。近三年来，国家体育总局和各省、自治区、直辖市共投资兴建健身路径近万条，全国共建全民健身工程1939个，为全民健身活动的开展提供了更好的条件。2000年，政府建立国民体质监测系统，计划将国民体质监测指标纳入国家社会发展综合评价指标体系。中国已全面登上世界体育舞台，运动技术水平位居世界前列。在2000年第二十七届奥运会上，中国运动员夺得28枚金牌、16枚银牌和15枚铜牌，列居世界第三位。2000年全年在国内外的比赛中，中国运动员共获得了110个世界冠军，14人2队30次创22项世界纪录。
Medical care and the physique of the people have constantly improved. At the end of 2000, China had 325,000 medical centers (including clinics), 3.18 million hospital beds and 4.49 million medical personnel. Some 89.8 percent of villages had medical centers, with 1.32 million rural doctors and other medical personnel. Meanwhile, physical culture has developed vigorously, a nationwide health-building drive has been launched, and the physique of the Chinese people throughout the country has improved greatly. In the past three years, the State Physical Culture Administration and all the provinces, autonomous regions and centrally administered municipalities have invested in the construction of nearly 10,000 special health-building outlets. In addition, China has constructed a total of 1,939 health-building projects for the whole people. All these have provided favorable conditions for the launching of the health-building drive across the country. In 2000, the Chinese government set up a people's physique monitoring system, planning to include the people's physique monitoring targets in the state's comprehensive social development appraisal targets. China has mounted the stage of world sport in all its sectors and joined the front ranks of sports internationally. At the 27th Olympic Games, held in 2000, Chinese athletes won 28 gold medals, 16 silver medals and 15 bronze medals, ranking China third in the world at the Sydney Olympics. In domestic and international games in 2000, Chinese athletes won 110 world championships, and 14 athletes and two teams chalked up a total of 22 world records on 30 occasions.
生活水平的大幅改善极大地提高了人民的健康水平。中国的人口死亡率由1949年前的33‰下降到1999年的6.46‰。居民平均预期寿命从1949年前的35岁提高到2000年的71.8岁，比发展中国家高出10岁，达到了中等发达国家水平。
　The drastic improvement of the people's living standards has greatly raised the level of the people's health. The death rate of the Chinese population decreased from 33 per thousand before 1949 to 6.46 per thousand in 1999. The people's life-expectancy on average was raised from 35 years before 1949 to 71.8 years in 2000, or 10 years longer than that of the developing countries and reaching the level of the moderately-developed countries.
公民政治权利的保障
 The Guarantee of Citizens' Political Rights
中国积极推进民主与法制建设，不断完善人民代表大会制度、中国共产党领导的多党合作和政治协商制度，大力加强基层民主建设，切实保障公民的政治权利。
China has actively promoted the building of democracy and the legal system, constantly perfected the people's congress system and the multi-party cooperation and political consultation system under the leadership of the Communist Party of China (CPC), and made great efforts to strengthen the building of democracy at the grass-roots level and earnestly safeguard citizens' political rights.
人民代表大会制度是中国的根本政治制度。在中国，一切权力属于人民，人民行使国家权力的机关是全国人民代表大会和地方各级人民代表大会。全国人民代表大会是最高国家权力机关，决定国家大政方针，行使国家立法权。九届全国人大三次会议以来，全国人大及其常委会共审议了30件法律案，已有18件通过。其中，2000年颁布实施的《中华人民共和国立法法》是关于国家立法制度的重要法律，对于健全国家立法制度，维护国家法制的统一，建立和完善有中国特色的法律体系，推进民主和法制建设，有着十分重大的意义。
The people's congress system is China's fundamental political system. All power in China belongs to the people. The organs through which the people exercise state power are the National People's Congress (NPC) and the local people's congresses. The NPC is the supreme organ of state power. It decides state policies and principles, and exercises the state legislative power. Since the Third Session of the Ninth NPC, the NPC and its Standing Committee have examined 30 proposed laws, of which 18 have been approved. The Legislation Law of the People's Republic of China, promulgated for implementation in 2000, is an important law concerning the state legislation system, and is of great significance in perfecting that system, safeguarding its unification, setting up and improving the law system with Chinese characteristics and promoting the building of democracy and the legal system.
全国人大及其常委会对法律的实施和行政、审判、检察机关的监督明显加强，富有成效。2000年，全国人大常委会组织执法检查组，先后对刑事诉讼法、城市居民委员会组织法等四项法律的实施情况进行了检查，有效地监督了这些法律的贯彻实施。全国人大常委会采取视察、执法检查、听取和审议工作报告等多种形式，对国务院、最高人民法院、最高人民检察院的工作进行监督。为加强预算监督和经济工作监督，全国人大常委会分别于1999年2月、2000年3月通过了《关于加强中央预算审查监督的决定》、《关于加强经济工作监督的决定》。此外，全国人大常委会正在抓紧研究制定《监督法》。人大代表参与行使国家权力的热情进一步提高。2001年3月举行的九届全国人大四次会议期间，代表共提出1040件议案，是六届全国人大以来提出议案最多的一年。
The NPC and its Standing Committee have vigorously reinforced the implementation of the laws and the supervision over the administrative, judicial and procuratorial organs, and notable results have been achieved. In 2000, the NPC Standing Committee organized a law-enforcement inspection group, which has checked the implementation of four laws, such as the Criminal Procedure Law and the Organic Law of the Urban Neighborhood Committees, thus effectively supervising the implementation of these laws. The NPC Standing Committee supervises the work of the State Council, Supreme People's Court and Supreme People's Procuratorate by various means, such as inspection, law-enforcement examination, and hearing and deliberating work reports. To strengthen the supervision of the budget and economic work, the NPC Standing Committee adopted the Resolution on Strengthening the Examination and Supervision of the Central Budget in February 1999, and the Resolution on Strengthening the Supervision of Economic Work in March 2000. In addition, the NPC Standing Committee is working out a Supervision Law. Deputies to the NPC have increased their enthusiasm for participating in the exercise of state power. At the Fourth Session of the Ninth NPC held in March 2001, the deputies raised 1,040 proposals, a record number since the Sixth NPC.
共产党领导的多党合作和政治协商制度是中国民主政治制度的重要组成部分。中国人民政治协商会议由中国共产党、各民主党派、无党派人士、人民团体、各少数民族和各界的代表，台湾同胞、港澳同胞和归国侨胞的代表以及特别邀请的人士组成，具有广泛的代表性。各级政协组织和各民主党派在履行政治协商、民主监督、参政议政职能中发挥着越来越重要的作用。目前，八个民主党派中央主席、全国工商联主席和其他13位民主党派、无党派及各界党外人士共有22人分别担任了全国人大常委会副委员长或全国政协副主席；全国31个省、自治区、直辖市有27名民主党派、无党派人士担任副省长、副主席、副市长或助理；有近万名民主党派、无党派人士担任县以上政府、政府部门和司法机关领导职务；有14万多名民主党派、无党派人士当选为各级人大代表，22万多名民主党派、无党派人士担任各级政协委员。
The multi-party cooperation and political consultation system under the leadership of the CPC is an important component of China's democratic political system. The Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) consists of representatives of the CPC, democratic parties, personages without party affiliation, people's organizations, ethnic minorities and other walks of life, as well as representatives of compatriots from Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macao, returned overseas Chinese and specially invited individuals. Hence, the CPPCC has extensive representation. The committees of the CPPCC at all levels and the democratic parties are playing a more and more important role in political consultation, democratic supervision, and participation in the deliberation and administration of state affairs. Now the chairmen of the central committees of the eight democratic parties, the chairman of the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce and 13 other people from the democratic parties, personages without party affiliation and non-Party personages from all walks of life, totaling 22, serve as vice-chairmen of the NPC Standing Committee or vice-chairmen of the CPPCC National Committee. Twenty-seven democratic party personages and personages without party affiliation serve as vice-governors, vice-chairmen, vice-mayors or assistants in the country's 31 provinces, autonomous regions and centrally administered municipalities; nearly 10,000 democratic party personages and personages without party affiliation hold leading posts in the governments, government departments and judicial organs at or above the county level; more than 140,000 democratic party personages and personages without party affiliation have been elected deputies to the people's congresses at different levels; and more than 220,000 democratic party personages and personages without party affiliation are members of the CPPCC committees at different levels.
2000年，全国政协积极参政议政、建言献策，就“十五”期间（2001年至2005年）经济和社会发展中的若干重大问题组织政协委员开展专题调研和视察，召开专题座谈会、研讨会，先后向中共中央提交了《关于“十五”期间推进经济结构调整的几点意见》、《关于“十五”计划必须体现体制创新的建议》等10多份报告，为国家制定《国民经济和社会发展第十个五年计划纲要》提供了重要参考。全国政协还在专题研究的基础上，就实施西部大开发战略、加紧实施南水北调工程、完善社会保障体系、加快分配体制改革、推进社区建设、深化司法体制改革、确保司法公正与社会稳定等问题，向中共中央和国务院提出许多意见和建议。
In 2000, the CPPCC National Committee actively participated in the deliberation and administration of state affairs, offered advice and suggestions, organized CPPCC National Committee members to make special investigations and inspections of a number of important issues concerning economic and social development during the 10th Five-Year Plan period (2001-2005), held special forums and symposiums, and submitted to the CPC Central Committee more than 10 reports, such as Opinions on Promoting the Readjustment of the Economic Structure During the 10th Five-Year Plan Period, and the Proposal on the Need for the 10th Five-Year Plan to Embody Systems Innovation, thus providing important reference material for the state's formulation of the Outline of the 10th Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development. On the basis of special research, the CPPCC National Committee has raised many opinions and suggestions to the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on implementing the strategy for the all-out development of the western region, speeding up the project to divert water from the south to the north, perfecting the social security system, quickening the reform of the distribution system, promoting the building of communities, deepening the reform of the judicial system, and guaranteeing judicial fairness and social stability.
各级政协组织、各民主党派和无党派人士开展民主监督的渠道进一步拓宽。现有数万名各民主党派、无党派人士担任各级人民检察院和监察、审计、教育、国土资源、税务、人事、公安等部门特约人员，参与法律监督和行政监督工作。各级政协委员通过对重大问题的协商讨论和对国家机关及其工作人员的工作提出批评、建议等形式，反映各界群众的意见和要求，行使民主监督权利。2000年，全国各级政协委员出席公安机关严格公正文明执法的法制教育等“三项教育”座谈会13万余人次，到公安机关视察1.1万人次，对公正执法起到了有力的督促作用。
The channels for the CPPCC committees at all levels, all democratic parties and all personages without party affiliation to engage in democratic supervision have been further widened. Now, tens of thousands of democratic party personages and personages without party affiliation serve as special advisors to the people's procuratorates, and to supervision, auditing, education, land resources, taxation, personnel and public security departments, participating in legal and administrative supervision. Members of CPPCC committees at all levels reflect the opinions and demands of the masses of all walks of life and exercise their right to democratic supervision through discussing significant issues, criticizing the work of state organs and their work personnel, making suggestions and other means. In 2000, members of CPPCC committees throughout the country attended the symposiums on strict, fair and civilized law enforcement held by the public security organs, more than 130,000 person-times, and inspected public security organs 11,000 person-times, thus playing a powerful supervision role in impartial law enforcement.
以民主选举、民主决策、民主管理和民主监督为基本内容的农村基层民主政治建设全面推进，稳步发展。1998年11月修订的《村民委员会组织法》实施以来，各地的民主选举、村民议事、村务公开的制度建设不断完善，有23个省、自治区、直辖市制定了新的村委会选举办法，17个省、自治区、直辖市通过了村委会组织法实施办法，许多市、县制定了指导村民自治工作的实施意见，村一级普遍制定或修订了村规民约和村民自治章程；全国有27个省、自治区、直辖市先后进行了村委会换届选举，约有6亿农民参加了直接选举，参选率高达80%以上，村民自治的整体水平明显提高。与此同时，乡镇政务公开全面推进，2000年以来，全国有3.5万个乡镇开展了政务公开工作，占乡镇总数的80%以上，乡级民主政治建设取得明显进展。
Building democratic politics at the grass-roots level in rural areas with democratic election, decision-making, administration and supervision as the basic contents has been promoted in an all-round way, and developed steadily. Since the implementation of the Organic Law of the Villagers' Committees, which was revised in November 1998, the building of the systems of democratic election, discussion of village affairs by the villagers themselves, and making village affairs public has been constantly improved. Twenty-three provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities in China have worked out the new electoral procedures for the villagers' committees; 17 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities have adopted the measures for implementation of the Organic Law of the Villagers' Committees; many cities and counties have worked out the implementation guidelines for villagers' self-government work; and almost all villages have formulated or revised their village regulations and agreements, and regulations on villagers' self-government. The villagers' committees in 27 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities have been re-elected with some 600 million farmers participating directly in the elections, accounting for an attendance rate of more than 80 percent. The villagers' self-government level as a whole has markedly improved. Meanwhile, making township political affairs public has been promoted in an all-round way. Since 2000, 35,000 townships throughout the country have made their political affairs public, making up well over 80 percent of the total number of townships. Thus, remarkable progress has been made in the building of democratic politics at the township level.
人权的司法保障
 Judicial Guarantee for Human Rights
中国高度重视通过完善立法、公正司法和严格执法来保护人权，人权司法保障工作取得了长足的进展。
Attaching great importance to safeguarding human rights through perfecting legislation, ensuring an impartial judicature and strictly enforcing the law, China has made considerable progress in building a judicial guarantee for human rights.
依法治国是中国的一项宪法原则，是中国政府的基本治国方略。改革开放以来，全国人大及其常委会共制定了390多件法律和有关法律问题的决定，国务院制定了800多件行政法规，地方人大制定了8000多件地方性法规，现已形成以宪法为核心的比较完整的法律体系，社会生活各个领域基本做到了有法可依，公民的各项人权有了全面的法律保障。为了提高各级行政执法和司法人员的法治意识及公民的权利义务意识，中国积极开展法治宣传和群众性普法活动。近五年来，全国有7.5亿人参加了各种形式的学法活动；共举办省部级领导专题法制讲座280多次，参加讲座的省部级领导1.2万人次；经过正规法律培训的地厅级领导达18.4万人次。
It is a principle of the Chinese Constitution and the basic program of managing state affairs of the Chinese government to run the country according to law. Over 390 laws and decisions involving legal problems have been formulated by the NPC and its Standing Committee, more than 800 administrative laws and regulations by the State Council, and 8,000-plus local laws and regulations by the local people's congresses since the initiation of reform and opening-up. As a result, a fairly complete legal system has taken shape, with the Constitution as the core. There are laws covering all fields of social life, providing a comprehensive judicial guarantee for the various human rights of the citizens. To improve the legal sense of the administrative law executors and judicial personnel at various levels and the sense of the rights and duties of the citizens, China has actively carried out publicity stressing the rule of law and mass activities promoting knowledge of the law. Some 750 million people in China have participated in activities involving the study of laws, over 280 special lectures on the legal system for leaders at the provincial or ministerial level have been held with an accumulative total of 12,000 participants, and 184,000 leaders at the prefectural or departmental levels have received regular legal training in the past five years.
中国依法惩治犯罪，保障公民的生命财产安全和其他各项人权不受侵犯。2000年，公安、司法机关采取有力措施，依法严厉打击黑社会性质的组织犯罪、涉枪、涉爆犯罪和团伙犯罪等严重暴力犯罪以及盗窃、抢劫等多发性犯罪活动，依法惩处极少数组织和利用“法轮功”邪教组织致人死亡、聚众扰乱社会秩序等犯罪分子，有力地维护了社会稳定和人民的生命财产安全。
China punishes criminal offences in accordance with the law, and protects the safety of citizens' lives and property and other human rights from infringement. In 2000, the public security and judicial organs adopted forceful measures to crack down on serious crimes of violence in accordance with the law, such as crimes with gangster connections and characteristics, crimes involving the use of guns and explosives, and gang-related crimes, as well as frequently occurring criminal activities such as theft and robbery. They also punished, according to law, a handful of criminals who caused deaths or gathered people to upset the public order by organizing and using the "Falun Gong" cult, effectively safeguarding social stability and the people's lives and property.
各级法院深化司法体制改革，加强审判和执行工作，积极推行审判长和独任审判员选任制，全面落实公开审判制度，完善司法救助制度，进一步强化法院内部监督制约机制和纠错机制，有效地维护了司法公正。2000年，全国法院共审理各类一审刑事案件56万余件，判处罪犯64万余人；审理各类一审民事案件341万余件；审理经济、知识产权、海事海商案件131万余件；审理国家赔偿案件2447件；审结行政诉讼案件86614件，其中，撤销行政机关不适当的具体行政行为13635件，占审结行政诉讼案件的15.74%；共清理超审限案件13.8万余件，清理执行积案47.5万余件，基本消除了案件积压现象，有效地维护了公民、法人和其他组织的合法权益。
To deepen the reform of the judicial system, courts at various levels have strengthened the administration of justice and law enforcement, actively implemented the system of choosing and appointing presiding judges and individual jurors, fully carried out the system of public adjudication, perfected the judicial rehabilitation system, and further intensified the internal supervisory and circumscribing mechanism of the courts and the mechanism for correcting errors, thereby effectively safeguarding impartial justice. In 2000, China's courts tried or handled over 560,000 criminal cases at the first instance, in which more than 640,000 criminals were sentenced; over 3.41 million civil cases at the first instance; more than 1.31 million cases involving economic, intellectual property and maritime affairs; 2,447 cases involving state compensation; 86,614 administrative lawsuits, including 13,635 cases involving the revocation of inappropriate administrative practices by administrative organs, or 15.74 percent of the total number; and cleared over 138,000 cases exceeding the trial time-limits, and some 475,000 long-pending cases, basically liquidating the arrears of cases and effectively safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of citizens, legal persons and other organizations.
为切实保障经济困难的当事人依法行使诉讼权利，2000年7月，最高人民法院制定了《关于对经济确有困难的当事人予以司法救助的规定》，完善了司法救助制度，对民事、行政案件中经济确有困难的当事人，尤其是涉及老年人、妇女、未成年人、残疾人、下岗职工等追索赡养费、扶养费、抚育费、抚恤金、养老金和交通、医疗、工伤等事故的受害人追索医疗费用和物质赔偿等诉讼案件，依法实行缓交、减交或者免交诉讼费用。2000年，全国法院依法对当事人决定减、缓、免交诉讼费用的案件共19万余件。
To earnestly guarantee that persons in financial difficulty can exercise their litigation rights according to law, the Supreme People's Court formulated the Regulations on Providing Judicial Assistance for Litigants Actually in Financial Difficulty in July 2000 to improve the judicial assistance system. According to the Regulations, in dealing with civil and administrative cases involving litigants actually in financial difficulty, especially the elderly, women, minors, the disabled persons and laid-off workers pressing for payment of alimony, the costs of maintenance and upbringing, pensions for families of deceased persons and old-age pensions, or for payment of medical costs and acquisition of material compensations for victims of traffic or industrial accidents and faulty medical treatment, payment of litigation costs may be postponed, reduced or remitted in accordance with the law. In 2000, courts across the country made decisions on such costs in more than 190,000 cases.
检察机关依法加强诉讼监督，提高办案质量，维护公民的合法权利。2000年，全国检察机关依法立案查办司法人员贪赃枉法、徇私舞弊犯罪案件4626件；对公安机关使用强制措施不当等违法情况提出纠正意见14349件次；纠正侦查、起诉、审判阶段超期羁押64254人次；对认为确有错误的刑事判决、裁定提出抗诉3798件，提出民事行政抗诉16944件；对违法的减刑、假释、保外就医等情况提出纠正意见9318人次。与此同时，检察院积极在全国推行主诉检察官办案责任制，通过竞争上岗、择优选任等形式选拔主诉检察官，并以此为基础进行公诉改革，试行不起诉案件公开审查制度和庭前证据开示制度，对于维护司法公正和保障犯罪嫌疑人的合法权益发挥了积极作用。律师制度和法律援助制度不断完善，对维护公民权利、促进司法公正起着日益重要的作用。目前，全国有律师事务所9500多家，律师11万多人。截至2000年7月，中国已批准了92家外国律师事务所和28家香港律师事务所在中国内地设立办事处。1999年，全国律师共受理各类诉讼案件136.4万件。2000年，全国律师参与辩护的刑事案件有31万多件，律师在刑事诉讼侦查阶段为犯罪嫌疑人提供法律帮助17万余件。到2000年底，全国已建立各级法律援助机构1853个，有专职人员6109人。2000年，全国共办理法律援助案件17万多件，总受援对象达22.8万多人，解答法律咨询83万人次，依法保护了社会的贫弱残者及相关当事人的合法权益。
Procuratorial organs have reinforced litigation supervision according to law to improve the quality of handling cases and safeguard the legitimate rights of citizens. In 2000, procuratorial organs throughout the country placed 4,626 criminal cases involving misconduct by judicial personnel on file for investigation according to law; put forward 14,349 rectification opinions against public security organs adopting improper mandatory measures and other law-violating actions; corrected cases of exceeding the time-limit of summoning criminal suspects for detention at the investigation, suing and adjudication stages, 64,254 person-times; protested 3,798 court decisions and rulings on criminal cases, which were regarded as wrong and 16,944 court decisions on civil administrative cases; and put forward rectification opinions against illegal commutation, release on parole or medical parole, 9,318 person-times. In the meantime, procuratorates have actively carried out nationwide a system of the main-suit procurator assuming full responsibility for handling cases, selected main-suit prosecutors through competition, and based on this, carried out the reform of public prosecutions, and trial-implemented the systems of public investigations of non-prosecution cases and the demonstration of evidence before the court-all these have gone a long way toward safeguarding impartial justice and the legitimate rights and interests of criminal suspects. The lawyer system and the system of legal assistance have been constantly improved, and are playing an increasingly important role in safeguarding the rights of citizens and promoting impartial justice. At present, there are over 9,500 lawyers' offices and more than 110,000 lawyers in China. In addition, 92 foreign law firms and 28 Hong Kong law firms had been allowed to set up offices on the Chinese mainland by July 2000. In 1999, lawyers throughout the country handled 1,364,000 lawsuits; in 2000, they participated in the defense of over 310,000 criminal cases, and provided legal assistance for criminal suspects at the criminal procedure and investigation stage in more than 170,000 cases. By the end of 2000, China had established 1,853 legal assistance organs at various levels, with 6,109 full-time personnel in their employ. In 2000, more than 170,000 cases of legal assistance were handled in China, in which over 228,000 persons received assistance, and 830,000 persons were offered consultancy on law-related problems, thus protecting the legitimate rights and interests of the poor, weak and disabled and other litigants.

中国依法保障罪犯的合法权利，改造罪犯的工作卓有成效，多年来刑满释放人员的重新犯罪率始终保持在6%至8%这一世界较低水平。各级人民检察院为加强对监狱人民警察执法工作的监督，进一步完善了在全国所有监所设立派出检察院、派驻检察室的驻监（所）检察制度。司法部从1999年起计划用三年时间开展监狱人民警察基本素质教育，监狱人民警察的执法水平有了明显提高。
China protects, in accordance with the law, the legitimate rights of prisoners, and has achieved remarkable results in reforming criminals. The recurrence rate of prisoners released at the end of their terms has remained between 6 and 8 percent for many years, a very low rate compared to those of other countries. To strengthen the supervision of the law enforcement of prison staff, the people's procuratorates at various levels have further improved the system of establishing resident agencies and offices in prisons throughout the country. In 1999, the Ministry of Justice began to carry out a three-year education program to improve the basic qualities of the prison police. As a result, their level of law enforcement has been markedly improved.
公民的经济、社会和文化权利
 The Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of Citizens
2000年，中国政府为保护劳动者的经济、社会和文化权利做出了新的努力，取得了新的进展。
In 2000, the Chinese government made new efforts and achieved new progress in the protection of workers' economic, social and cultural rights.
政府根据《劳动法》于2000年颁布实施了《劳动力市场管理规定》，从规范劳动力市场的角度为劳动者实现就业权提供了保障。据统计，2000年底，全国从业人员达7.1亿多人，比上年增加564万人；其中，城镇就业人员2.1亿多人，增加260万人。全年通过各种途径使361万国有企业下岗职工实现了再就业。2000年末，城镇登记失业率为3.1%。为更好地解决农村劳动者的就业问题，从2000年起，中国政府开展了为期三年的城乡统筹就业、组织农村劳动力转移培训、推进西部地区农村劳动力开发就业和鼓励扶持返乡创业的试点工作。
The government promulgated and implemented the Regulations on the Administration of the Labor Market in accordance with the Labor Law in 2000, providing a guarantee for workers' right to employment from the angle of standardizing the labor market. According to statistics, by the end of 2000, employees in China totaled more than 710 million, an increase of 5.64 million over the figure for the previous year, including over 210 million employees in cities and towns, an increase of 2.6 million. Last year, 3.61 million workers laid off by state-owned enterprises found new jobs through various channels. The registered urban unemployment rate was 3.1 percent by the end of 2000. To better solve the employment of rural labor, the Chinese government has carried out a three-year program for the overall planning of urban and rural employment since 2000, retraining rural workers, promoting the development and employment of the rural labor force in the western region, and encouraging and supporting migrant laborers to return to their home villages to start businesses.
国家积极发展职业培训事业，开发劳动者的职业技能，提高劳动者素质，增强劳动者的就业能力和适应职业变化的能力。2000年，中国政府制定了《招用技术工种从业人员规定》和《劳动预备制培训实施办法》。据统计，2000年，全国有技工学校4098所，在校生150多万人；培训中心3000多所，年培训408万人次；社会培训机构16000所，年培训360万人次。全国共有450万失业人员和下岗职工参加了再就业培训，30万人参加了创业指导和创业培训，75万未能继续升学的城镇初、高中毕业生参加了劳动预备制培训。2000年，各类中等职业技术教育学校招生425万人，在校生1295万人；全国成人技术培训学校培训学员9642万人次。目前，全国近3000万人获得了职业资格证书。
China has worked hard to develop job training with a view to enhancing workers' job skills and quality and improving their capabilities of finding employment and adapting to job changes. In 2000, the Chinese government formulated the Regulations on Employing Skilled Workers and the Procedures for Implementation of the Training of Labor Reserves. According to statistics, there were 4,098 secondary technical training schools nationwide with an enrollment of over 1.5 million in 2000; more than 3,000 training centers, with an annual admission to 4.08 million; and 16,000 training centers run by social sectors, with an annual admission to 3.6 million. A total of 4.5 million jobless persons and laid-off workers received new skill training, 300,000 people received guidance for and training in starting businesses, and 750,000 junior and senior middle school graduates in urban areas who failed to continue further studies received training under the "training of labor reserves" program. In 2000, 4.25 million students were admitted to various secondary vocational and technical schools, bringing the enrollment of such schools to the grand total of 12.95 million; and 96.42 million people received training at the adult technical training schools. To date, approximately 30 million people have obtained professional credentials in China.
国家保障劳动者取得劳动报酬的权利，职工工资水平不断提高。2000年，政府制定了《进一步深化企业内部分配制度改革的指导意见》和《工资集体协商试行办法》，加强了对企业工资工作的指导。1999年，城镇在岗职工工资总额为9875.5亿元，比上年增长6.2%；城镇在岗职工平均工资为8346元，比上年增长11.6%，扣除价格因素，实际增长13.1%。到2000年底，除西藏外，全国各省、自治区、直辖市都建立并完善了最低工资保障制度，调整颁布了本地区最低工资标准。
The state guarantees the workers' right to obtain payment for labor, and their wages have been on the increase. In 2000, the government formulated the Guidelines on Further Deepening the Reform of the Internal Distribution System of Enterprises and the Trial Measures on Settling Wages Through Collective Negotiations, to strengthen the guidance for the wage-related work of enterprises. In 1999, the wages of workers in cities and towns totaled 987.55 billion yuan, an increase of 6.2 percent over the figure for the previous year; and their per capita wage was 8,346 yuan, an increase of 11.6 percent over the previous year, and a 13.1 percent growth in real terms, allowing for price fluctuations. By the end of 2000, all the provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities, except Tibet, had established and improved a minimum-wage guarantee system, readjusted and issued the standards for minimum wages in their own areas.
为维护劳动者的社会保障权利，中国初步建立了以城镇职工基本养老保险、基本医疗保险、失业保险为主要内容的社会保险制度，提高了国有企业下岗职工基本生活保障、失业保险和城镇居民最低生活保障的水平。到2000年底，全国所有城市和县人民政府所在镇已全部建立了城镇居民最低生活保障制度，共有381.8万城镇居民得到最低生活保障救济；有15个省、自治区、直辖市建立了农村居民最低生活保障制度，300万村民获得最低生活保障救济，发放保障金7.3亿元。2000年，中国财政大幅度增加社会保障支出，仅中央财政就安排养老、失业、下岗职工基本生活保障和城镇居民最低生活保障等社会保障支出478亿元，比1999年增长86%。到2000年底，全国有10408万职工参加失业保险，月平均领取失业保险金人数为188万人；有10447万职工和3170万离退休人员参加了基本养老保险；有4300万职工参加了基本医疗保险；有2000多个县、市建立了工伤保险制度，覆盖职工4200万人；27个省、自治区、直辖市试行了生育保险，1412个县、市实行了生育保险费用社会统筹，约3000万职工参加了生育费用社会统筹。
To safeguard the social security rights of workers, China has preliminarily established a social insurance system, mainly covering basic pension insurance, basic medical insurance and unemployment insurance for workers in cities and towns. It had enhanced the level of the basic livelihood guarantee of workers laid off by state-owned enterprises, the level of unemployment insurance, and the level of ensuring a minimum standard of living for urban residents. By the end of 2000, the system for ensuring a minimum standard of living for urban residents had been established in all cities and towns where the people's governments at the county level are located, benefitting 3.818 million urban residents; 15 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities had established such a system for rural residents, benefitting three million villagers with a total of 730 million yuan. In 2000, the cost of social insurance increased substantially in the state financial expenditure, and the social security costs, such as old-age pension, unemployment insurance, the basic livelihood guarantee for laid-off workers, and the minimum-standard-of-living guarantee for urban residents arranged by the central budget reached 47.8 billion yuan, an increase of 86 percent over 1999. By the end of 2000, a total of 104.08 million workers in China had participated in the unemployment insurance program, with a monthly average of 1.88 million receiving unemployment insurance; 104.47 million workers and 31.7 million retirees had participated in the basic pension insurance program; 43 million workers had participated in the basic medical insurance program; over 2,000 counties and cities had established the system of insurance against injuries at work, covering 42 million workers; 27 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities had tried out childbirth insurance, and 1,412 counties and cities introduced the childbirth insurance mutual assistance program, in which approximately 30 million workers participated.
国家加大对教育的投入，积极为公民实现受教育权利创造条件。“九五”期间，教育经费平均每年增长15.56%，高于国民经济的增长速度。全国财政性教育经费占国内生产总值的比例持续增长，由1995年的2.41%增长到1999年的2.79%。1999年全国教育总经费是1995年的1.8倍。国家实施“贫困地区义务教育工程”，中央和地方向852个贫困县投入教育专款116亿元。国家制定了《关于国家助学贷款的管理规定（试行）》和《中国工商银行国家助学贷款操作规程（试行）》，全面实行助学贷款制度，保障经济困难学生的受教育权利。到2000年底，中国基本普及了九年义务教育，基本扫除了青壮年文盲，普及九年义务教育的人口覆盖率达到85%，青壮年文盲率下降到5%以下。据统计，2000年，全国幼儿园共有在园幼儿2244万人；全国普通小学在校生1.3亿多人，小学学龄儿童入学率达99.1%；初中在校生6256万人，初中毛入学率达88.6%；普通高中1.46万所，在校生1201万人；普通高校1041所，在校生556万人；成人高校772所，在校生354万人；研究生培养单位738个，在校生30.1万人；特殊教育学校在校生37.8万人。
China has increased its investment in education to create favorable conditions for citizens to exercise their right to receive education. During the Ninth Five-Year Plan period, the education fund increased at a rate of 15.56 percent annually on average, which was higher than the growth speed of the national economy. The proportion of the national financial education fund in the GDP increased continuously, rising from 2.41 percent in 1995 to 2.79 percent in 1999. The nation's total education fund in 1999 was 1.8 times that of 1995. The central and local governments raised an 11.6-billion-yuan special education fund for 852 poverty-stricken counties following the introduction of the "project for compulsory education in poverty-stricken areas." The state formulated the Regulations on the Administration of State Loans for Students (for trial implementation) and the Regulations on the Operation of the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China State Loans for Students (for trial implementation), so as to comprehensively institute the student loan system to guarantee students with financial difficulties the right to receive education. By the end of 2000, China had virtually made nine-year compulsory education universal, covering 85 percent of the population, and basically wiped out illiteracy among the young and adults, reducing the rate of young and adult illiterates to less than five percent. Statistics show that there were 22.44 million children in kindergartens in China in 2000; over 130 million pupils in primary schools, the attendance rate of school-age children reaching 99.1 percent; 62.56 million students in junior middle schools, the gross attendance rate reaching 88.6 percent; 12.01 million students in 14,600 senior middle schools; 5.56 million students in 1,041 institutions of higher learning; 3.54 million students in 772 adult institutions of higher learning; 301,000 students in 738 institutions for training postgraduates; and 378,000 students in special education schools.
文化事业发展迅速，人民的精神文化生活日益丰富。2000年末，全国共有艺术表演团体2622个，文化馆2911个，公共图书馆2769个，博物馆1373个，档案馆3816个；共出版全国性和省级报纸203亿份，各类杂志28.5亿册，图书63.5亿册（张）；共有中、短波广播发射台和转播台732座，广播综合人口覆盖率达到92.1%；有一千瓦以上电视发射台和转播台1313座，电视综合人口覆盖率93.4%；全国有线电视用户7920万户，成为世界上有线电视用户最多的国家。
Cultural undertakings have developed rapidly, and the people's cultural life has become increasingly rich and colorful. By the end of 2000, China had 2,622 performing art troupes; 2,911 cultural centers; 2,769 public libraries; 1,373 museums; 3,816 archive establishments; national and provincial newspapers with a circulation of 20.3 billion copies, magazines with a circulation of 2.85 billion copies, and books with a circulation of 6.35 billion copies; 732 medium- and short-wave broadcasting transmitting and relay stations, covering 92.1 percent of the population; and 1,313 TV transmitting and relay stations each with more than 1,000 watts, covering 93.4 percent of the population. China has 79.2 million users of cable television, ranking first in the world.
通讯事业迅猛发展，建立了贯通全国、连接全球的世界第二大立体通信网，电话用户规模跃居世界第二。到2000年底，全国电话用户已达2.3亿户，其中移动电话用户8526万户，仅次于美国；城市电话普及率为每百人39部，通电话的行政村比例达80%。数据与多媒体通信网已覆盖全部地、市和部分县、市，与中国移动通信公司和中国联通实现自动漫游的国家和地区达84个。中国自1994年接入互联网络以来，互联网用户从当年的仅1万户增加到目前的2250多万户，现有国内网站2.73万多个。
Telecommunications have advanced by leaps and bounds. The second-biggest three-dimensional communications network in the world linking the whole country and the rest of the world has been established, and the number of telephone subscribers ranks second in the world. By the end of 2000, there were 230 million telephone subscribers nationwide, including 85.26 million subscribers of mobile phones, second only to the United States; for every 100 urban residents there are 39 telephones on average, and telephone service covers 80 percent of the administrative villages. Digital and multi-media communications networks now cover all prefectures and cities, and some counties. Automatic roaming through the networks of the China Mobile Communications Corporation and the China Unicom reaches 84 countries and regions. The users of the Internet have risen from 10,000 in 1994, when China joined the Internet network, to well over 22.5 million. There are more than 27,300 websites in China at present.
妇女、儿童权利的保护
 Protection of Women and Children's Rights
中国妇女在政治、经济、社会、教育和婚姻家庭等方面的权利继续得到有效促进和保护。妇女参与国家和社会管理的程度明显提高。九届全国人大代表和九届全国政协委员的女性比例分别比上届增加0.8个和2个百分点。目前，全国女公务员人数约占公务员总数的1／3；30个省、自治区和直辖市的党政领导班子中有了女干部，比5年前增长46.47%；668个城市中有463名女性当选为正、副市长。全国各省、市、自治区总工会领导班子中均有1至2名女主席或女副主席。
Sustained efforts have been made to promote and effectively protect Chinese women's rights in the political, economic, social, educational, marital, domestic and other spheres. The extent of Chinese women's involvement in the management of state and social affairs has markedly increased. The ratios of women deputies to the Ninth NPC and women members on the CPPCC Ninth National Committee have risen by 0.8 and 2 percentage points, respectively, as compared with the NPC and CPPCC National Committee of the last terms. At present, women civil servants account for one third of the country's total. Women hold leading posts in the Party committees and governments of 30 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities, an increase of 46.47 percent over the figure five years ago. In the 668 cities of China, there are 463 women mayors and vice-mayors. Among the leaders of the federations of trade unions of each province, municipality and autonomous region, there are one to two chairwomen or vice-chairwomen.
妇女就业人数不断增加，行业分布趋于合理。截至2000年10月，中国女性从业人数达3.3亿人，占全国从业人员总数的46.7%。妇女就业从传统产业向第三产业转移，女性在农业、采掘业、制造业、建筑业中的比重呈下降趋势，在文化、教育、科技、卫生、金融、保险、交通运输、邮电和国家机关、社会团体及其他行业中的比重增加，这种转移更适合妇女的生理特点，有利于妇女在经济生活中的全面发展。2000年，全国农村有4000多万妇女接受了农业高新技术培训，有5位农家妇女获得由世界妇女高峰基金会颁发的“农村妇女生活创造奖”。
The number of employed women has continuously grown, and their work involvement has become rational. By October 2000, the number of women employees had reached 330 million, accounting for 46.7 percent of the total number of employees in China. The employed women have tended to shift to tertiary industry from conventional industries. The ratio of women engaged in agriculture, and the extractive, manufacturing and building industries is declining, while the ratio in culture, education, science and technology, health care, finance, insurance, transportation, posts and telecommunications, state organs, mass organizations and other sectors, is increasing. Such a shift facilitates the comprehensive development of women in economic activities, since it is more suited to women's physiological characteristics. In 2000, a total of well over 40 million women in China's rural areas received agricultural high-tech training, five of whom won the "Prize for Women's Creativity in Rural Life" of the Women's World Summit Foundation.
妇女的受教育水平进一步提高。据统计，近年来，中国15岁以上妇女人均受教育年限的增幅、妇女文盲率的下降幅度均大于男性，男女受教育水平差距进一步缩小。2000年，妇女人均受教育年限超过6.5年，成年男女受教育年限的差距由1995年的1.7年减少为不到1.5年。近几年，中国每年扫除文盲近300万，其中65%是妇女。1999年底，妇女成人文盲率为21.6%，15至45岁的妇女文盲率为7.2%。2000年，全国小学女童入学率达99.07%，与男童入学率的99.14%大体持平。幼儿园、小学、职业中学、普通中学、中等师范学校、中等技术学校和普通高等学校的女生人数，分别占同类在校生总数的46.08%、47.60%、47.17%、46.17%、67.49%、54.63%和40.98%。中国各类女专业技术人员1.1亿多人，占专业技术人员总数的40.6%，比1995年增长了14.8%，其中具有中、高级职称的女专业技术人员分别为326.3万人、43.6万人。中国科学院、中国工程院现有女院士70人，占院士总数的6%，居世界领先水平。
Women's educational level has risen further. According to statistics, in recent years both the incremental extent of the length of education enjoyed by women above the age of 15 and the declining extent of their illiteracy rate are larger than men's, and the gap in the educational levels of the two sexes is further narrowing. In 2000, the average length of education enjoyed by women exceeded 6.5 years, and the length gap between adult men and women in this regard narrowed from 1.7 years in 1995 to less than 1.5 years. In the past few years, China has helped nearly three million illiterates each year to learn how to read and write, among whom 65 percent were women. By the end of 1999, the illiteracy rate of adult women was 21.6 percent, and the illiteracy rate of women between 15 and 45 years old was 7.2 percent. In the year 2000, the ratio of primary school attendance for girls throughout China reached 99.07 percent, almost equal to the 99.14 percent for boys. Female students in kindergartens, primary schools, vocational secondary schools, regular secondary schools, secondary normal schools, secondary technical schools and regular institutions of higher learning made up 46.08 percent, 47.60 percent, 47.17 percent, 46.17 percent, 67.49 percent, 54.63 percent and 40.98 percent of the total number of students attending schools of the same kind, respectively. Among the nation's professionals, more than 110 million were women, constituting 40.6 percent of the total, or an increase of 14.8 percent over 1995. Among those female professionals, 3.263 million and 436,000 have professional titles of middle and senior ranks, respectively. Furthermore, currently there are 70 female academicians at the Chinese Academy of Sciences and Chinese Academy of Engineering, making up 6 percent of the total, which is a fairly high ratio internationally.
妇女的健康状况不断改善。2000年，全国有妇幼保健院609个，卫生技术人员7.2万人；妇幼保健所、站2598个，卫生技术人员7.5万人。截至1999年，全国孕产妇保健覆盖率已超过86%，农村妇女新法接生率达95.4%；孕产妇死亡率由1995年的61.9／10万下降到56.2／10万。2000年起，中国政府在西部和农村贫困地区实施为期二年的专项计划，预计拨款2亿元，用于降低孕产妇死亡率和消除新生儿破伤风。中国扶贫基金会于2000年10月正式启动了“母婴平安120行动”，致力于在中西部七省、市贫困地区建立县、乡、村三级妇幼保健和救护机构，以促进贫困人口母婴生命保健，消除孕产妇生育过程中母婴平安脆弱性和低保障性。该项目将历时10年，资金总额预计达3200万元。
Women's health conditions have constantly improved. In 2000, there were 609 hospitals specially for women and children, employing 72,000 medical personnel, and 2,598 clinics for women and children, employing 75,000 medical personnel. By 1999, the ratio of health care for pregnant and puerperal women throughout the country had exceeded 86 percent, and 95.4 percent of rural women had access to the modern method of midwifery. The mortality rate of pregnant women and women in labor dropped to 56.2 per 100,000 from 61.9 per 100,000 in 1995. Beginning in 2000, the Chinese government has practiced a two-year special plan in the western region and impoverished rural areas with 200 million yuan earmarked to combat the maternal mortality rate and eliminate trismus nascentium. In October 2000, the China Poverty Relief Fund formally started the Strategic Plan of "Action 120 for the Safety of Mother and Baby," committing itself in establishing health and first-aid organs for women and children at the county, township and village levels in the poverty-stricken areas in the six provinces and one municipality in the central and western parts of China, to improve the health care of poor mothers and babies, and eliminating the mortality rate of babies, pregnant women and women in labor. An estimated 32 million yuan is to go to this 10-year campaign.
国家采取各种措施，切实保护妇女各项权利不受侵犯。为更有效地制止家庭暴力、遏制重婚纳妾、完善家庭财产制度，保护妇女的婚姻家庭权利不受侵犯，全国人大动员社会各界进行认真研究，积极开展《婚姻法》的修订工作，并于2001年1月将《婚姻法（修正草案）》向全社会公布，广泛征求意见，展开讨论。目前，全国各地方人大和政府已制定了20多个预防和制止家庭暴力的地方性法规和政策。到2000年10月底，全国已有13个省、47个地市县建立了由多个部门参与的妇女维权联席会议制度，定期协调督查妇女权益保障工作。法院系统设置了544个维护妇女、儿童权益的合议庭，聘请4266名妇联组织的专职维权干部担任人民陪审员，直接参与妇女权益案件的审理工作。2000年4至7月，公安机关在全国开展依法打击拐卖妇女、儿童犯罪活动，共破获拐卖妇女、儿童案件2万余起，查获犯罪团伙7600个，使一批被拐卖的妇女、儿童得到解救或妥善安置。
The state has adopted measures to effectively protect women's rights against infringement. To curb domestic violence, bigamy and taking concubines more effectively, perfect the family property system and protect women's rights in marriage and the family against infringement, the NPC mobilized people of various circles to conduct serious research for the revision of the Marriage Law, and publicized the draft amendments to the Marriage Law in January 2001 for public discussions. So far, the people's congresses and governments at all levels have formulated over 20 local regulations and policies for preventing and curbing domestic violence. By the end of October 2000, 13 provinces and 47 prefectures, cities and counties throughout the country had established the system of joint conference for protecting women's rights, attended by many departments, to regularly coordinate, supervise and examine the work of protecting women's rights and interests. The court system has set up 544 collegiate panels for safeguarding the rights and interests of women and children, employing 4,266 full-time cadres from women's organizations as people's assessors to directly participate in the trial of cases involving women's rights and interests. Between April and July 2000, the public security organs launched a nationwide movement to crack down on crimes of abducting and trafficking in women and children, in accordance with the law, and uncovered some 20,000 such cases, which involved 7,600 criminal gangs, saving or making proper arrangements for the resettlement of a large number of women and children who had been abducted and sold.
儿童权利得到有效保护。国家长期坚持计划免疫预防接种卡片制度，开展对儿童肺炎、腹泻、佝偻病和缺铁性贫血病的防治和爱婴行动，促进母乳喂养，创建爱婴医院，开展营养指导、儿童生长发育监测、新生儿疾病筛查、儿童早期教育等多项卫生保健服务，使儿童发育水平和营养状况不断改善。2000年，儿童死亡率比1990年降低了1／3，儿童营养不良率下降了一半。为促进儿童健康成长，“中国儿童少年安全健康成长计划”于2000年10月正式启动，其基本任务是通过一系列宣传、培训、服务等行动，为儿童健康成长营造良好的社会环境，帮助儿童远离失学、疾病、伤害和犯罪，切实保护儿童权益。截至1999年底，“希望工程”共接受捐款18.4亿元，援建希望小学7812所，资助失学儿童230万人。2000年，中国儿童少年基金会募集资金8100余万元，资助实施“春蕾计划”，使重返校园的失学女童人数累计突破105万人次。
The rights of children have been effectively protected. China has constantly upheld the prophylactic immunization filing system for children to prevent and control pneumonia, diarrhea, rickets and iron-deficiency anemia. China has also conducted a baby-friendly campaign, advocated breast feeding, built baby-friendly hospitals, provided health care services such as children's nutrition guide, monitoring of children's growth, examination of newborn infant diseases, and preschool education for children, increasingly improving children's growth level and nutrition conditions. In 2000, child mortality dropped by one third as compared with 1990, and the rate of malnutrition among children dropped by 50 percent. To promote the healthy development of children, the Program for the Safe and Healthy Development of Chinese Children was initiated in October 2000. The basic tasks of this program are, through a series of publicity activities and providing training and services, to create a favorable social environment for the sound development of children, help children to stay away from dropout, disease, injury and crime, and effectively protect the rights and interests of children. By the end of 1999, the "Hope Project" had received a total of 1.84 billion yuan in donations, with which it had helped the construction of 7,812 "Hope" primary schools and aided 2.3 million dropouts. In 2000, the Children's Foundation of China raised some 81 million yuan to support the implementation of the "Spring Buds Program," helping a total of 1.05 million girl dropouts return to school.
少数民族的平等权利和特殊保护
 Equal Rights and Special Protection for Ethnic Minorities
在中国，少数民族人民不仅同汉族人民一样平等地享有宪法和法律规定的全部公民权利，而且还依法享有少数民族特有的各项权利。为保障少数民族的平等权利和特殊权益，中国在少数民族聚居地区实行民族区域自治制度。2001年2月，九届全国人大常委会对《民族区域自治法》进行了修改，把民族区域自治制度提升为国家的一项基本政治制度，增加了在民族自治地方实行必要的特殊政策、加大对民族自治地方的投入、加快民族自治地方发展等若干新规定，进一步强化了对各民族自治地方自治权利的法律保障。据统计，中国55个少数民族现有人口1亿多，占全国总人口的8.41%；实行民族区域自治的少数民族人口占少数民族总人口的75%。少数民族平等参与管理国家事务的权利和自主管理本地区、本民族事务的自治权利依法受到保障。在历届全国人大、政协中，少数民族代表和委员所占的百分比，都大大超过少数民族在全国人口中所占的比例；55个少数民族不论人口多少都有自己的代表和委员。在九届全国人大和九届全国政协中，共有少数民族代表428名、委员257名，分别占代表总数和委员总数的14.37%和11.7%。民族自治地方的人大常委会，依法由实行区域自治民族的公民担任主任或副主任；各自治区主席、自治州州长、自治县县长依法都由实行区域自治民族的公民担任，各自治地方人民政府的其他组成人员都合理配备实行区域自治的民族和其他少数民族的人员。到1999年底，全国有少数民族干部282.4万人。2000年，西藏自治区有5万多名民族干部，藏族干部超过干部总数的70%。在西藏自治区人大代表中，藏族和其他少数民族代表超过80%。
In China, ethnic minorities enjoy not only all the rights citizens are entitled to by the Constitution and laws as the Han people do, but also the special rights enjoyed only by ethnic minorities according to law. To guarantee the equal rights and special rights and interests of ethnic minorities, China practices a system of regional ethnic autonomy in ethnic minority areas. In February 2001, the Standing Committee of the Ninth NPC made amendments to the Law Governing Regional Ethnic Autonomy, upgrading the system of regional ethnic autonomy as part of the basic political system of China. New stipulations added in the Law include: carrying out necessary special policies in the ethnic autonomous areas, and increasing investments in and accelerating the development of these areas, which have further strengthened the legal guarantee of autonomy in the autonomous areas. According to statistics, the 55 ethnic minorities in China have a combined population of more than 100 million, or 8.41 percent of the country's total population, of which 75 percent enjoy regional ethnic autonomy. The right of ethnic minorities to participate in the administration of state affairs on an equal footing and the autonomous right to manage their own regions and affairs are safeguarded by law. In the NPC and the CPPCC National Committee of successive terms, the percentage of ethnic minority representatives has far exceeded the proportion of the ethnic minority population in the national population, and each of the 55 ethnic minorities, no matter what their populations, has its own representatives. There are altogether 428 ethnic minority deputies to the Ninth NPC and 257 ethnic minority members on the CPPCC Ninth National Committee, accounting for 14.37 percent and 11.7 percent of the total, respectively. Among the chairperson or vice-chairpersons of the standing committee of the people's congress of an autonomous area there shall be one or more citizens of the ethnic group or groups exercising regional autonomy in the area concerned. The head of an autonomous region, autonomous prefecture or autonomous county shall be a citizen of the ethnic group exercising regional autonomy in the area concerned, and the other members of the people's governments of these regions, prefectures and counties shall include members of the ethnic group exercising regional autonomy as well as members of other ethnic minorities so far as it is reasonable. By the end of 1999, there are altogether 2.824 million ethnic minority cadres. In 2000, there were over 50,000 ethnic minority cadres in the Tibet Autonomous Region, and Tibetan cadres accounted for over 70 percent of the total number of cadres there. Tibetan deputies and those of other ethnic minorities exceeded 80 percent of the total number of deputies to the people's congresses of the Tibet Autonomous Region.
国家对少数民族地区的经济和社会发展实行扶助政策，提供资金、技术、人才等方面的支援，促进了少数民族地区经济、社会的发展和人民生活水平的提高。2000年，民族地区国内生产总值比上年增长8.1%左右，继续保持了1997年以来高于全国的平均水平；民族地区地方财政收入比上年增长14.2%。社会消费品零售总额比上年增长9.0%。1994年至1999年，民族地区累计解决3000多万贫困人口的温饱问题。近年来，中央政府给西藏的财政定额补贴每年都达12亿元以上。总投资46亿元的62项援藏工程以及中央国家机关有关部委和15个对口支援省、市投资32亿元援建的716项工程已全部竣工并投入使用。据统计，西藏的公路里程已达2.5万公里，电力总装机达34万千瓦，邮电通信实现了县县通电话，并进入全国长途自动交换网，初步建立了适应市场经济发展的基础设施。西藏国内生产总值突破百亿元，国民经济连续6年超过全国的平均发展速度，年均增长达10.7%。农业生产连续13年丰收，粮油肉实现基本自给。目前，西藏98%的商品供过于求，彻底改变了过去80%所需物资要靠从内地调拨的状况。西藏绝对贫困人口由1994年的48万人减少到目前的7万人左右，多数群众开始迈向小康生活。
The state implements an assistance policy toward the economic and social development of the minority regions, by providing funding, technology and personnel to promote the economic and social development and the improvement of the people's living standard in those regions. In 2000, the GDP of these regions increased by an average of 8.1 percent, compared with the previous year. This rate has been higher than that of the national average since 1997. The financial revenue of these regions increased by 14.2 percent over that of the year before; and the total volume of retail sales of consumption goods increased by 9.0 percent over that of the previous year. From 1994 to 1999, the minority regions had solved the problems of food and clothing for over 30 million poverty-stricken people. In recent years, the annual financial set-quota subsidy from the Central Government to Tibet has been over 1.2 billion yuan annually. The 62 aid-Tibet projects with a total investment of 4.6 billion yuan and another 716 projects, with a total investment of 3.2 billion yuan from ministries, commissions and other central government institutions, and 15 provinces and municipalities have been completed and put to use. According to statistics, the length of highways in Tibet has reached 25,000 km; the total installed capacity of electricity has reached 340,000 kw; and all counties in Tibet have set up telephone systems connected with the national one. An infrastructure suited to the development of a market economy is now in initial shape in Tibet. The GDP of Tibet has surpassed the ten billion yuan mark, and the growth rate of the region's economy has exceeded the national average for six years running, at 10.7 percent annually. There have been bumper harvests for the past 13 years, and now the Tibetans can support themselves with the grain, oil and meat produced by themselves. Nowadays, 98 percent of the commodities in Tibet are in excess of demand, a sharp contrast to the old days when 80 percent of needed goods in Tibet had to be transferred from the inland areas. The number of absolutely poor people in Tibet has been reduced from the 480,000 in 1994 to the present 70,000. Most of the people in Tibet today are fast on their way to living a relatively comfortable life.
国家大力支持少数民族地区发展教育事业，专门设立了少数民族教育补助经费和各种财政专款。政府于2000年开始实施“东部地区学校对口支援西部贫困地区学校工程”和“西部大中城市对口支援本省（自治区、直辖市）贫困地区学校工程”，并制定了《关于加快少数民族和民族地区职业教育改革和发展的意见》，要求采取多种措施建立健全发展少数民族地区职业教育的经费投入机制和保障机制，积极为少数民族地区培训教师和管理人员。据统计，2000年，全国有少数民族专任教师92.5万人，各级各类学校少数民族在校生1852.49万人；小学、普通中学、普通高等学校中的少数民族学生占学生总数的比例分别为9.08%、6.77%、5.71%。55个少数民族都有了本民族的大学生，有的还有了硕士生和博士生。自1951年西藏和平解放至今，国家为发展西藏的教育事业，累计投入10亿多元，不仅在内地设立了西藏中小学和大学西藏班，而且在西藏建立了4所大学、1000多所中小学，使西藏适龄儿童入学率由过去的不到2%提高到目前的85.8%，为西藏培养了3万多名各类人才。
The state makes great efforts to support the ethnic minority regions in developing education, and has set aside special subsidies and funds for this purpose. In 2000, the government began to carry out the "Project for Schools in Eastern Regions to Aid Schools in Poverty-Stricken Areas in the West" and the "Project for Large and Medium Cities in the West Aiding Schools in Poverty-stricken Areas in Their Own Provinces (Autonomous Regions or Municipalities)." Besides, the government worked out the "Proposals on Accelerating the Reform and Development of Vocational Education in Ethnic Minority Regions and Regional Ethnic Autonomy Areas," demanding that measures be taken to establish and perfect an effective system and safeguard mechanism for investment in vocational education development in ethnic minority regions and to train teachers and management personnel for these regions. According to statistics, in 2000 there were 925,000 full-time ethnic minority teachers and 18.5249 million ethnic minority students in schools of all levels and types across the country. Minority students in primary schools, middle schools and colleges accounted for 9.08 percent, 6.77 percent and 5.71 percent, respectively, of the total number of students in those schools. Now all the 55 ethnic minorities have their own college students, and some even have master's and doctor's degree holders. Since the peaceful liberation of Tibet in 1951, the state has poured over one billion yuan into the development of education in Tibet. The state has not only set up Tibetan secondary and primary schools in inland regions, and Tibetan classes at inland universities, but it has also set up four universities and more than 1,000 secondary and primary schools in Tibet, bringing the attendance rate of Tibetan school-age children to 85.8 percent from less than 2 percent before 1951, and has trained over 30,000 personnel with various skills for Tibet.
国家保障少数民族使用和发展本民族语言文字的自由。民族自治地方的自治机关执行公务和广播、影视、图书、报纸、杂志等都依法使用当地通用的一种或多种语言文字。五十年代开始，中国政府根据少数民族自愿自择的原则帮助10多个少数民族创制和改进文字体系。目前，全国55个少数民族中，有53个少数民族有自己的语言，语种达80多种；21个少数民族有现行的本民族文字27种，这些文字都实现了计算机信息处理。许多少数民族都拥有了自己语言文字的广播、影视、图书、报纸、杂志。国家帮助少数民族地区实行民族语文教学、双语教学，加强民族文字教材建设。西藏中小学普遍实行藏语教学或藏汉语双语教学，从小学到高中共16门学科的181种课本、122种教学参考书和16种教学大纲被编译成藏文。继蒙古文网站之后，世界首家藏文网站同元藏文网站已于1999年12月在中国兰州西北民族学院建成。
The state safeguards the freedom of the ethnic minorities to utilize and develop their own languages. The organs of self-government in autonomous areas may use one or several languages commonly used in the locality, according to law, in performing their functions, in film, radio and television, and in books, newspapers and magazines. Since the 1950s, the Chinese government has helped over 10 ethnic minorities create and improve scripts of their own choice on the principle of voluntariness. Nowadays, 53 of the 55 ethnic minorities across the country have their own languages, including over 80 dialects; 21 ethnic minorities have a total of 27 scripts of their own in current use, which are all computer-readable; and many of the minorities have radio, film, television, books and periodicals in their own languages. The state helps the minority regions to institute teaching in the local languages or bilingual teaching and to enhance the editing of teaching materials in minority languages. Primary and middle schools in Tibet teach in the Tibetan language or in both the Tibetan and Chinese languages, and all the 181 textbooks, 122 teaching reference books and 16 syllabi of 16 courses used in schools from the primary to the senior high have been translated into Tibetan. After the establishment of the Mongolian Language Net, the first Tibetan language net in the world-the Tongyuan Tibetan Language Net-was established in December 1999 at the Northwest Institute for Ethnic Minorities in Lanzhou, Gansu Province.
中国重视保护和发展少数民族的传统文化，尊重少数民族的饮食、婚姻、丧葬、年节等风俗习惯和宗教信仰。2000年2月，文化部、国家民委联合发布了《关于进一步加强少数民族文化工作的意见》，强调要保护各少数民族独特的传统文化和丰富的文化遗产，在符合一定条件的地方建立少数民族文化生态保护区，要求东部汉族发达地区加强对西部少数民族地区文化项目建设的支援。目前，全国有24所高等艺术院校开设专门培养少数民族艺术人才的专业班，在民族院校和民族自治地方的一些中高等院校也开设有关少数民族文学、音乐、舞蹈、美术专业。九十年代以来，中央和地方财政投入专项补助资金，在民族地区新建、扩建和修缮了一批图书馆、文化馆、群众艺术馆、博物馆和影剧院。近年来，中央和西藏自治区政府先后投入近3亿元，对布达拉宫、萨迦寺、大昭寺、哲蚌寺、阿里古格王朝遗址等重要文物单位进行有效维修和保护。目前，全国共有藏学研究机构50多个，研究人员2000多名，藏、汉和英文的藏学学术刊物10多种，代表中国古代藏民族文化最高成就的英雄史诗《格萨尔》藏文精选本前四卷已出版发行。西藏藏医学院作为中国最大、最权威的藏医大学，已经培养出650多名本专科毕业生和10名硕士生。
The Chinese government set store by protecting and developing the traditional cultures of ethnic minorities, and respects their folkways and customs in such aspects as diet, marriage, funeral, festival celebration and religious belief. In February 2000, the Ministry of Culture and State Commission of Ethnic Affairs jointly promulgated the "Proposals on Further Strengthening Ethnic Minority-related Cultural Work," stressing the need to protect the unique traditional cultures and rich cultural heritages of all the ethnic minorities and set up ethnic minority cultural and ecological preservation zones where possible, at the same time demanding that the Han-inhabited eastern developed regions increase their assistance to the minority-inhabited western regions in their projects for cultural development. To date, 24 art universities and colleges across the country have opened classes specially for training artists of minority origin, and all the colleges for ethnic minorities and some middle schools and colleges in autonomous areas have also offered special courses of study on minority literature, music, dance and fine arts. Since the 1990s, the central and local budgets have earmarked special subsides and funds for building, extending or repairing a number of libraries, cultural centers, cultural clubs, museums, cinemas and theaters. In recent years, the central and Tibetan regional governments have spent nearly 300 million yuan to repair and protect the Potala Palace, Sakya Monastery, Jokhang Temple and Drepung Monastery, the Guge Kingdom ruins in Ngari, and other important cultural and historical sites. At present, there are over 50 Tibetan studies institutes nationwide with over 2,000 researchers, and more than 10 Tibetological periodicals in the Tibetan, Chinese and English languages. The first four Tibetan-language volumes of the Tibetan epic King Gesar, the highest achievement of ancient Tibetan culture, have been published. The College of Tibetan Medicine, the biggest and most authoritative of its kind in China, has trained over 650 undergraduate students and students of junior college level and 10 master's degree students.
由于自然、历史等多种因素的影响，少数民族比较集中的西部地区与东南沿海地区在社会经济的发展上还存在着较大差距，这在相当大程度上制约着少数民族生存和发展状况的改善。为从根本上解决这个问题，中国政府于2000年开始全面实施西部大开发战略，从政策、资金、人才等各个方面加大对少数民族地区的支持力度。这必将有力地促进少数民族地区的经济、社会发展和少数民族平等权利的充分实现。
Due to the influence of natural, historical and other factors, the western region, where ethnic minorities are concentrated, lags far behind the south eastern seaboard region economically-a fact which, to a large extent, restricts the improvement of the conditions for the subsistence and development of the minority peoples. To solve this problem once and for all, the Chinese government began in 2000 to implement a strategy for the all-out development of the west, at the same time intensifying its assistance to the minority regions in policy-related matters, funds and personnel. This will forcefully promote economic and social development in these regions, and the full realization of the equal rights of ethnic minorities.
积极开展人权领域的对外交流与合作
 Actively Carrying Out International Exchanges and Cooperation in the Realm of Human Rights
中国政府一贯尊重《联合国宪章》促进和保护人权的宗旨和原则，支持联合国为此所做的努力，并积极参与联合国人权领域的活动。
The Chinese government always respects the purpose and principle of the Charter of the United Nations for promoting and protecting human rights, supports the UN efforts in this regard and actively participates in the UN activities in the realm of human rights.
中国政府历来重视国际人权公约在促进和保护人权方面的积极作用，现已批准或加入了18个国际人权公约。中国政府先后于1997年10月和1998年10月签署了《经济、社会及文化权利国际公约》和《公民权利和政治权利国际公约》。2001年2月28日，九届全国人大常委会第二十次会议审议批准了《经济、社会及文化权利国际公约》，充分显示了中国政府开展国际人权合作的积极态度，也表明了中国促进和保护人权的坚定决心和信心。2000年9月，中国政府签署了《〈儿童权利公约〉关于买卖儿童、儿童卖淫和儿童色情制品问题的任择议定书》，成为首批签署该公约的国家之一。对于已批准的国际人权公约，中国一贯认真对待，采取各种措施履行公约义务，并根据有关公约的规定及时提交公约执行情况的报告，接受有关联合国条约机构的审议。2000年，中国政府向联合国提交了《消除一切形式种族歧视国际公约》的第八次和第九次执行报告，并如期向联合国提交了香港特别行政区执行《经济、社会及文化权利国际公约》和《公民权利和政治权利国际公约》情况的报告，增进了有关公约机构和国际社会对中国人权状况的了解。
The Chinese government has always attached great importance to the positive role of international conventions on human rights in promoting and protecting human rights, and has approved or acceded to 18 such conventions. The Chinese government signed the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in October 1997 and October 1998, respectively. On February 28, 2001, the former covenant was deliberated and ratified at the 20th meeting of the Ninth NPC Standing Committee. This fully demonstrates the Chinese government's positive attitude toward carrying out international cooperation in human rights as well as China's firm determination and confidence in promoting and protecting human rights. In September 2000, the Chinese government signed the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography, becoming one of the first signatory countries to this Convention. China has always taken seriously those international conventions on human rights it has ratified, adopted various measures to fulfill its duties under these conventions and submitted timely reports on their implementation, as stipulated by related conventions, for deliberation and discussion by related UN organs. In 2000, the Chinese government submitted to the UN its eighth and ninth reports on the implementation of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and, in a timely manner, presented to the UN its report on the implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. These have helped the UN concerned departments and the international community to gain a better understanding of the human rights situation in China.
中国重视联合国人权事务高级专员在促进和保护人权方面的作用，并积极与人权高专办公室开展合作。2000年3月，中国政府与人权高专办在北京成功举办了第八届亚太人权研讨会。40多个亚太地区国家的代表参加了会议。中国国家主席江泽民致信祝贺，国务院副总理钱其琛出席会议并发表讲话。人权高专玛丽?罗宾逊专程来华参加了会议。2000年11月，玛丽?罗宾逊应邀再次访华。中国国家主席江泽民、国务院副总理钱其琛分别会见了她。外交部与其签署了《关于开展人权领域技术合作的谅解备忘录》。根据该备忘录，今后两年中国将与联合国人权高专办公室在司法管理、人权教育、法制建设以及实现发展权和经济、社会、文化权利等领域开展项目合作。中国还积极开展与联合国人权委员会专题特别报告员和工作组的合作，迄今已两次邀请联合国人权委员会任意拘留问题工作组访华，宗教不容忍问题报告员也曾应邀访华。中国还及时、认真答复了包括人权委员会特别报告员在内的联合国人权机制转来的有关人权问题的函件，澄清了有关事实，增进了联合国和国际社会对中国的了解。此外，中国还与联合国开发计划署合作举办了关于邪教问题的国际研讨会，就各国如何处理邪教、保障人权进行了交流与探讨。
China attaches importance to the role of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in promoting and protecting human rights, and has actively cooperated with the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. In March 2000, the Chinese government and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights together successfully sponsored the Eighth Symposium on Human Rights in the Asian-Pacific Region in Beijing, with representatives from over 40 Asian-Pacific countries attending. Chinese President Jiang Zemin wrote a letter congratulating the opening of the symposium, and Vice-Premier of the State Council Qian Qichen attended and spoke at the symposium. Mary Robinson, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, made a special trip to China to attend the symposium. In November 2000, Mary Robinson visited China again on invitation. During her stay in China, President Jiang Zemin and Vice-Premier Qian Qichen met with her, respectively, and the Chinese Foreign Ministry signed with her the Memorandum of Understanding Between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China and the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights on the Mutual Agreement to Cooperate in the Development and Implementation of Technical Cooperation Programs. It is defined in the Memorandum that China will carry out project cooperation with the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in the two coming years in the fields of judicial administration, human rights education and legal system, as well as the fulfillment of the right to development and the economic, social and cultural rights. China has actively carried out cooperation with the special rapporteurs and working groups on thematic issues of the UN Commission on Human Rights. It has twice invited the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention of the UN Commission on Human Rights to visit China, and the Special Rapporteur on Religious Intolerance has also visited China on invitation. China has, in a timely and earnest manner, answered the letters on human rights transmitted by the special rapporteurs of the Commission on Human Rights and other UN human rights mechanisms, clearing up a number of facts and helping the UN and international community toward a better understanding of China. In addition, China and the UN Development Program also jointly sponsored an international symposium on the problem of cults, to carry out exchanges and explore on how to deal with cults and safeguard human rights by various countries.
中国一贯主张，各国应在平等和相互尊重的基础上就人权问题开展对话与交流，增进了解，扩大共识，缩小分歧。2000年2月和9月中国与欧盟分别举行了第九次和第十次人权对话。5月和12月分别举行了中欧第四次和第五次司法研讨会。2月和10月，中国与英国分别举行了第四次和第五次人权对话。8月，中国与澳大利亚举行了第四次人权对话。10月，中国与加拿大举行了第六次人权对话。5月，中国与挪威联合举办了第四次人权与法治圆桌会议。6月，中国、加拿大和挪威第三届人权研讨会在曼谷举行。2000年，中国与古巴、老挝等许多发展中国家开展了人权磋商和交流。10月，中国在北京成功举办了“中非合作论坛北京2000年部长级会议”，中国国家主席江泽民、4位非洲国家元首，以及来自45个非洲国家的近80名部长和有关国际和地区组织的负责人出席会议。会议通过的《中非合作论坛北京宣言》强调，人权的普遍性原则和基本自由应得到尊重，世界的多样性和求同存异原则必须得到维护；各国在促进和保护本国人权时有权选择不同的方式和模式；将人权问题政治化以及在提供经济援助时附加人权条件，本身就是违反人权，应予以坚决反对。
China has consistently advocated carrying out dialogues and exchanges by all countries on the human rights issue on the basis of equality and mutual respect so as to enhance understanding, promote consensus and reduce differences. In February and September 2000, respectively, China held the ninth and tenth dialogues on human rights with the European Union. China and the European Union held the fourth and fifth judicial symposiums in May and December, respectively. In February and October respectively, China and Britain held the fourth and fifth dialogues on human rights. In August, China held its fourth human rights dialogue with Australia. In October, China and Canada held the sixth dialogue on human rights. In May, China and Norway jointly held the fourth round-table meeting on human rights and the rule of law. In June, China, Canada and Norway held the Third Symposium on Human Rights in Bangkok, Thailand. In 2000, China held consultations and exchanges on human rights with Cuba, Laos and many other developing countries. In October, China successfully held the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation-Ministerial Conference Beijing 2000 in Beijing, with Chinese President Jiang Zemin and four heads of state from Africa, nearly 80 ministers from 45 African countries and leaders of related international and regional organizations attending. In the Sino-Africa Cooperative Forum Beijing Declaration adopted at the meeting, it is emphasized that the principle of universality of human rights and basic freedoms should be respected, and the diversity of the world and the principle of seeking common ground while reserving differences must be safeguarded; that each country has the right to choose different ways and modes of promoting and protecting human rights domestically; and that politicalizing the issue of human rights and attaching human rights conditions to economic aid are themselves violations of human rights, and therefore should be firmly opposed.
人权的发展是各国社会发展的一个重要方面，是一个不断前进的历史过程。中国是一个人口众多的发展中国家，受自然、历史和发展水平等诸多因素的制约，中国的人权正处于发展过程之中，人权状况还存在着不少有待进一步改善的地方。中国政府将根据自己的国情和人民的意愿，以建设民主、文明的现代化法治国家为目标，积极吸收世界各国的有益经验和文化成果，在保持社会稳定的前提下，加快发展，加强民主法制建设和精神文明建设，不断推动中国人权事业向前发展。同时，中国将一如既往地积极参与国际人权领域的活动，广泛开展对外合作与交流，为促进国际人权事业的健康发展做出自己应有的贡献。
The progress of human rights is an important aspect of the social development of all countries, and it is a historical process of continuous advance. China is a developing country with a huge population. Due to restrictions of nature, history, level of development and other factors, the human rights cause in China is in the process of developing, and there is still much room for further improvement in its human rights situation. In the light of China's national conditions and according to the people's wishes, the Chinese government aims to build a democratic and modernized country with a high level of civilization under the rule of law, actively learn from the beneficial experiences and cultural achievements of other countries, and, while maintaining social stability, expedite development, strengthen the democratic and legal systems, promote social ethical progress, and continuously push forward the development of the human rights cause in China. At the same time, China will, as always, actively participate in international activities in the realm of human rights, carry out wide-ranging cooperation and exchanges with other countries, and make its due contribution to promoting the healthy development of the international human rights cause.
西藏的现代化发展
Tibet's March Toward Modernization

中华人民共和国 国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council of the Peoples Republic of China

二○○一年十一月?北京
November 2001, Beijing


目　录
Contents

前 言
Foreword

西藏社会发展的跨越式进程
The Rapid Social Development in Tibet

西藏现代化的发展成果
 Tibet's Modernization Achievements
西藏现代化发展的历史必然性  
 The Historical Inevitability of Tibet's Modernization

前   言　　
Foreword
现代化是近代以来世界各国、各地区都面临的一个重大课题。自十九世纪中叶遭受西方列强入侵以来，摆脱贫穷落后、任人宰割的命运，建设独立、统富强、民主、文明的现代化国家，一直是摆在包括西藏人民在内的中国各族人民面前的首要任务。中华人民共和国成立以来特别是改革开放以来，中国的现代化建设事业蒸蒸日上，取得了举世瞩目的发展，中国正以雄健的步伐走向更加开放和繁荣。中国西藏也以和平解放为起点，经过民主改革，废除了封建农奴制度，实行了民族区域自治制度，实现了社会制度的历史性跨越；经过社会主义建设和改革开放，实现了现代化建设事业的快速发展，走上了与全国同步发展的轨道，展现出美好的发展前景。
Modernization has been an important issue confronting countries and regions worldwide in modern times. Since the invasion of the Western powers in the mid-19th century, it has been the most important task of the people of all ethnic groups in China, the Tibetan people included, to get rid of poverty and backwardness, shake off the lot of being trampled upon, and build up an independent, united, strong, democratic and civilized modern country. Since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, and especially since the introduction of reform and opening to the outside world, the modernization drive in China has been burgeoning with each passing day, and achieved successes attracting worldwide attention. China is taking vigorous steps to open even wider and become more prosperous. China's Tibet, with its peaceful liberation in 1951 as the starting point, has carried out regional ethnic autonomy and made a historical leap in its social system following the Democratic Reform in 1959 and the elimination of the feudal serf system. Through carrying out socialist construction and the reform and opening-up, Tibet has made rapid progress in its modernization drive and got onto the track of development in step with the other parts of the country, revealing a bright future for its development.
今年是西藏和平解放五十周年，回顾西藏和平解放以来走向现代化的历程，展现西藏各族人民在中央政府和全国人民的支援下为实现现代化努力奋斗的成果，揭示西藏现代化发展的规律，有助于加快西藏现代化建设事业的健康发展，也有助于消除国际社会在“西藏问题”上的各种误解，增进对西藏历史和现实情况的全面了解。
This year is the 50th anniversary of the peaceful liberation of Tibet. Looking back on the course of modernization since its peaceful liberation, publicizing the achievements in modernization made by the people of all ethnic groups in Tibet through their hard work and with the support of the Central Government and the whole nation, and revealing the law of development of Tibet's modernization-these will contribute not only to accelerating the healthy development of Tibet's modernization but also to clearing up various misunderstandings on the "Tibet issue" in the international community and promoting overall understanding of the past and present situations in Tibet.
西藏社会发展的跨越式进程　　
The Rapid Social Development in Tibet
现代化问题是近代以来西藏社会发展的根本问题。在西藏延续了几百年的政教合一的封建农奴制度，到近代已经成为与世界进步潮流背道而驰的极端腐朽没落的社会制度，它扼杀西藏社会生产力的发展，严重阻碍社会进步，使西藏陷入极度贫穷落后和封闭萎缩的状态，濒临全面崩溃的边缘。
Modernization has been the fundamental question in the social development of Tibet in modern times. The feudal serfdom under theocracy, which had lasted for several hundred years in Tibet, became an extremely decadent social system that contradicted the progressive trend in the modern world, for it stifled the development of the social productive forces of Tibet, seriously hindered social progress, relegated Tibet to the state of extreme poverty, backwardness, isolation and decline, to the point verging on total collapse.
社会制度落后，经济剥削异常残酷。旧西藏的封建农奴制社会比欧洲中世纪还要黑暗、落后。占西藏人口不到5%的官家、贵族和寺院上层僧侣三大领主，占有西藏的全部耕地、牧场、森林、山川以及大部分牲畜；而占西藏人口95%以上的农奴和奴隶，却不占有土地和其他生产资料，没有人身自由，不得不依附于领主的庄园为生或充当世代家奴,遭受强制的乌拉差役、租税和高利贷三重剥削，生活在死亡线的边缘。据不完全统计，仅噶厦（旧西藏地方政府）征收的差税种类就达200多种。农奴为噶厦和庄园主支的差，占农奴户劳动量的50%以上，高的达到70%至80%。60%以上的农牧民背负着沉重的高利贷债务。
-Backward social system and harsh economic exploitation. The society of old Tibet under feudal serfdom was even more dark and backward than in Europe in the Middle Ages. The three major estate-holders-officials, nobles and upper-ranking monks in monasteries-accounted for less than five percent of Tibet's total population but owned all the farmland, pastures, forests, mountains and rivers, and the majority of the livestock. The serfs and slaves, accounting for more than 95 percent of the population, owned no land or other means of production. They had no personal freedom, had to depend totally on the manors of estate-holders for livelihood or act as their family slaves from generation to generation. They were subjected to the three-fold exploitation of corvee labor, taxes and high-interest loans and their lives were no more than struggles for existence. According to incomplete statistics, there were over 200 kinds of taxes levied by the Kasha (the former local government of Tibet) alone. Slaves had to contribute more than 50 percent or even 70 to 80 percent of their labor free to the Kasha and estate-holders, and over 60 percent of the farmers and herdsmen were burdened with similar high-interest loans.
等级森严，政治压迫极端野蛮。旧西藏流行的《十三法典》和《十六法典》，将人分成三等九级，以法律的形式确认和维护人的社会政治地位的不平等。法典明文规定，上等上级的人的命价为与其尸体等重的黄金，而下等下级的人的命价仅为草绳一根。农奴主占有农奴的人身，可以随意买卖、转让、赠送、抵押和交换农奴，掌握着农奴的生、死、婚、嫁大权。不属同一农奴主的男女农奴结婚要缴纳“赎身费”，农奴的子女注定终身为农奴。农奴主可以任意打骂农奴，对农奴动用断手、剁脚、剜目、割耳、抽筋、割舌、投水、投崖等极为野蛮的刑罚。
Rigid hierarchy and savage political oppression. The "13-Article Code" and "16-Article Code" of old Tibet divided the people into three classes and nine ranks, enshrining social and political inequality between the different ranks in law. These codes explicitly stated that the life of a person of the highest rank of the upper class was literally worth his weight in gold, while that of a person of the lowest rank of the lower class was worth only the price of a straw rope. Serfs could be sold, transferred, given away, mortgaged or exchanged by their owners, who had the power over their births, deaths and marriages. Male or female serfs belonging to different owners had to pay a "redemption fee" if they wished to marry, and their children were doomed to be serfs for life. Serf-owners could punish their serfs at will. The punishments included flogging, cutting off their hands or feet, gouging out their eyes, chopping off their ears or tongues, pulling out their tendons, drowning them and throwing them down from cliffs.
政教合一，宗教桎梏沉重。宗教和寺院在旧西藏政教合一的社会政治结构中处于“万流归宗”的地位，成为唯一的意识形态和独立的政治、经济实体，拥有庞大的势力和众多的政治、经济特权，支配着人们的精神文化生活。寺院上层僧侣既是西藏的主要政治统治者，也是最大的农奴主之一。达赖喇嘛作为藏传佛教格鲁派的首领之一，兼任西藏地方政府的首脑，集政教大权于一身。原西藏地方政府实行僧俗官员双轨制，僧官大于俗官。据1959年统计，在全西藏330万克（此处指藏民族使用的面积计量单位，15克相当于1公顷）耕地中，寺院和上层僧侣占有121.44万克，占36.8%；贵族和由僧俗官员组成的官府则分别占24%和38.9%。哲蚌寺当时就拥有185座庄园、2万名农奴、300个牧场和1.6万名牧民。据二十世纪五十年代调查统计，西藏共有2700多座寺庙，12万僧人，占当时西藏总人口的12%，大约有四分之一的男子出家为僧。1952年拉萨3.7万城镇人口中，竟有1.6万名僧人。遍布西藏各地的寺庙、比例极高的僧人和众多的宗教活动，聚敛和消耗了西藏大量人力资源和绝大部分物质财富，成为妨碍生产力发展的沉重枷锁。正如美国藏学家梅?戈尔斯坦指出的，宗教和寺院集团是“西藏社会进步的沉重桎梏”和“极端保守的势力”；“正是由于全民族信教和宗教首领执掌政教大权这一因素，导致西藏丧失了适应不断变化的环境和形势的能力”① 。
Theocracy and the fetters of religion. Religion and monasteries "commanded the highest respect" in old Tibet with its theocratic socio-political structure. As the sole ideology and an independent politico-economic entity, they enjoyed immense influence and numerous political and economic privileges and had control over people's spiritual life. The upper-class monks and priests were Tibet's principal political rulers and also the biggest serf-owners. The Dalai Lama, as one of the heads of the Gelug Sect of Tibetan Buddhism and concurrently the leader of the local government of Tibet, had all the political and religious powers in his hands. The former local government of Tibet practiced a dual clerical and secular officials system, in which the monk officials were senior to the lay officials. According to the 1959 statistics, of the 3.30 million kai (unit of measurement for area used by the Tibetan people, 1 kai=1/15 hectare) of cultivated land in Tibet, 1.2144 million kai were owned by monasteries and upper-class monks, accounting for 36.8 percent of the total cultivated land, while aristocrats and clerical and secular officials owned 24 percent and 38.9 percent, respectively. The Drepung Monastery owned 185 manors, 20,000 serfs, 300 pastures and 16,000 herdsmen. According to a survey conducted in the 1950s, Tibet had more than 2,700 temples and monasteries and 120,000 monks, or 12 percent of the total population in Tibet, and about one-fourth of the male population were monks. In 1952, Lhasa had an urban population of 37,000, of whom 16,000 were monks. The widespread temples, numerous monks and frequent religious activities consumed a huge amount of manpower and the greater part of material wealth in Tibet, greatly hindering the development of the productive forces there. According to the American Tibetologist Melvyn C. Goldstein, religion and the monasteries were "extremely conservative" and "played a major role in thwarting progress" in Tibet; "This commitment…to the universality of religion as the core metaphor of Tibetan national identity will be seen…to be a major factor underlying Tibet's inability to adapt to changing circumstances."1
发展水平低下，人民生活朝不保夕。封建农奴制度的残酷压迫和剥削，特别是政教合一制度下宗教和寺院对人力、物力资源的无穷无尽的消耗及其对人们的精神奴役，严重地束缚了劳动者的生产积极性，窒息了社会的生机和活力，使得西藏长期处于停滞状态。直到二十纪中叶，西藏社会仍然处于极度封闭落后的状态，现代工商业和现代科技、教育、文化、卫生事业几乎没有，农业生产长期采用原始的耕作方式，牧业生产基本采取自然游牧方式，农牧品种单一退化，劳动工具得不到改进，粮食产量只有种子的四至十倍，生产力水平和整个社会的发展水平极其低下。广大农奴饥寒交迫，生存维艰，因饥寒贫病而死者不计其数。拉萨、日喀则、昌都、那曲等城镇中，乞丐成群，到处可见满街要饭的老人、妇女和儿童。
Low level of development and a precarious life. Cruel oppression and exploitation by the feudal serf-owners, and especially the endless consumption of human and material resources by religion and monasteries under the theocratic system and their spiritual enslavement of the people, had gravely damped the laborers' enthusiasm for production, stifled the vitality of the Tibetan society and reduced Tibet to a protracted state of stagnancy. Even in the middle of the 20th century, Tibet was still extremely isolated and backward, almost without a trace of modern industry, commerce, science and technology, education, culture and health care; primitive farming methods were still being used; and herdsmen had to travel from place to place grazing their livestock. There were few strains and breeds of grains and animals, and some of them had even degenerated. Farm tools were primitive, grain yield was only 4 to 10 times the seeds sown, and the level of both the productive forces and social development was very low. Deaths from hunger and cold, poverty and diseases were commonplace among the serfs, and the streets in Lhasa, Xigaze, Qamdo and Nagqu were crowded with beggars of both sexes, young and old.
帝国主义的入侵加重了西藏人民的灾难，也加深了西藏社会的矛盾，使本已破败不堪的西藏社会更加难以为继。十九世纪中叶以后，中国沦为半殖民地半封建社会，西藏与全国其他地方一样，遭受了西方列强的侵略。英帝国主义入侵西藏，大肆烧、杀、抢、掠，并通过强加一系列不平等条约攫取种种特权，疯狂掠夺资源，大量倾销商品，对西藏进行殖民控制和剥削。与此同时，他们在西藏少数上层统治者中培植亲信，寻找代理人，阴谋将西藏从中国分裂出去。广大农奴在内外双重压迫和剥削下生活急剧恶化，为摆脱绝境不断发动请愿、逃亡、抗租抗差和武装反抗。西藏社会危机四伏，“政教合一制度已像油尽的灯火一样走向没落。”②曾任旧西藏地方政府噶伦的阿沛?阿旺晋美在二十世纪四十年代多次指出：西藏“照老样子下去,过不了多久，农奴死光了，贵族也活不成，整个社会就将毁灭。”③ 这样，摆脱帝国主义侵略，打碎封建农奴制的枷锁，就成了西藏社会进步的历史必然和西藏人民的迫切愿望。
Imperialist invasion brought more disasters for the Tibetan people, and deepened the social contradictions in Tibet, making it go from bad to worse. From the middle of the 19th century, China became a semi-colonial and semi-feudal country, and Tibet, just like most other parts of the country, was invaded by the Western powers. In their invasions of Tibet British imperialists made no scruple about burning, killing and looting, secured many privileges through a number of unequal treaties, and carried out colonialist control and exploitation by wantonly plundering Tibet's resources and dumping their goods on the Tibetan people. At the same time, they fostered their trusted followers from among the ruling class and groomed their agents, in an attempt to divide Tibet from China. Weighed down by the internal and external double oppression and exploitation, the masses of the serfs fared worse and worse, driving them constantly to present petitions to the government, flee from the land, refuse to pay rent or offer corvee service and even raise armed revolts. Danger lurked on every side in Tibet and "the theocratic system is declining like a lamp consuming its last drop of oil."2 Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme, once a Kaloon (council minister) of the former local government of Tibet, pointed out in the 1940s several times that if Tibet "goes on like this, the serfs will all die in the near future, and the nobles will not be able to live either. The whole Tibet will be destroyed."3 So there was a historically imperative need for the progress of Tibetan society and the happiness of the Tibetan people to expel the imperialists and shake off the yoke of feudal serfdom.
1949年中华人民共和国成立，给苦难深重的西藏人民带来了希望。中央人民政府顺应历史发展规律，从西藏广大人民的利益出发，积极促成西藏和平解放，并通过推动民主改革、实行民族区域自治、进行大规模的现代化建设和改革开放等重大决策和措施，深刻地改变了西藏的命运，有力地推动了西藏社会的跨越式发展。
The founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949 brought hope for the deeply distressed Tibetan people. In conforming to the law of historical development and the interests of the Tibetan people, the Central People's Government worked actively to bring about Tibet's peaceful liberation. After that, important policies and measures were adopted for Tibet's Democratic Reform, regional autonomy, large-scale modernization and reform and opening-up. All this has contributed to changing the lot of Tibet and propelling Tibetan society forward in seven-league boots.
和平解放开启了西藏迈向现代化的大门。1951年5月23日，中央人民政府和当时的西藏地方政府签订了《关于和平解放西藏办法的协议》（以下简称《十七条协议》），标志着西藏实现和平解放，西藏的社会发展从此揭开了崭新的一页。西藏和平解放是中国民族民主革命的一部分，它使西藏摆脱了帝国主义势力的侵略及其政治、经济羁绊，结束了旧中国对藏民族的歧视和压迫，维护了中国的国家主权、统一和领土完整，实现了全国各民族的团结和西藏内部的团结，为西藏与全国一起实现共同进步和发展创造了基本前提。和平解放后，人民解放军和进藏工作人员坚决执行《十七条协议》和中央政府的政策，积极帮助西藏修筑康藏、青藏公路和当雄机场，兴修水利，建立现代工厂、银行、贸易公司、邮局、农场和学校等，采取各种措施帮助农牧民发展生产，开展社会救济、救灾活动，免费为群众防疫治病，推动了西藏经济、社会、文化事业的发展，展示了一种现代文明和进步的社会新气象，在西藏各阶层中都产生了深远影响，从而打破了西藏社会长期封闭、停滞的局面，开启了西藏走向现代社会的历史进程，为西藏社会进一步向前发展开辟了广阔的前景。
The peaceful liberation opened the way for Tibet to march toward modernization. On May 23, 1951 the "Agreement on Measures for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet" (hereinafter referred to as the "17-Article Agreement) was signed by the Central People's Government and the local government of Tibet, marking the realization of the peaceful liberation of Tibet and opening a new page for the development of the region. The peaceful liberation of Tibet, which was a part of China's national democratic revolution, enabled Tibet to shake off the penetration of imperialist forces and the political and economic shackles imposed by them, ended the discrimination and oppression against the Tibetan ethnic group in old China, safeguarded the national sovereignty, unification and territorial integrity of China, realized the unity of all ethnic groups in China and the internal unity of Tibet, and created the essential prerequisites for Tibet to join the other parts of the country in the drive for common progress and development. After the peaceful liberation, the People's Liberation Army and people from other parts of China working in Tibet persisted in carrying out the 17-Article Agreement and the policies of the Central Government, actively helped the Tibetan people build the Xikang-Tibet and Qinghai-Tibet highways, the Damxung Airport, water conservancy projects, modern factories, banks, trading companies, post offices, farms and schools. They adopted a series of measures to help the farmers and herdsmen expand production, started social relief and disaster relief programs, and provided free medical service for the prevention and treatment of epidemic and other diseases. All this has promoted the economic, social and cultural development of Tibet, created a new social atmosphere of modern civilization and progress, produced a far-reaching influence among people of all walks of life in Tibet, ended the long-term isolation and stagnation of the Tibetan society, paved the way for Tibet's march toward a modern society, and opened up wide prospects for Tibet's further development.
民主改革为西藏的现代化发展扫清了道路。1951年西藏实现和平解放时，考虑到西藏历史和现实的特殊情况，《十七条协议》在肯定了改革西藏社会制度必要性的同时，对改革采取了十分慎重的态度，规定：“西藏地方政府应自动进行改革，人民提出改革要求时，得采取与西藏领导人员协商的方法解决之”。但是，当时西藏上层统治集团中的一些人从根本上反对改革，叫嚣“长期不改，永远不改 ”，试图永远保持封建农奴制度。面对西藏人民日益高涨的民主改革要求，他们不是顺应民意，而是与国外反华势力相勾结，于1959年3月10日发动武装叛乱，图谋把西藏从祖国分裂出去，搞“西藏独立”。为了维护国家的统一和西藏人民的根本利益，中央人民政府采取果断措施，与西藏人民一道坚决平息了叛乱，并对西藏社会制度进行民主改革。
The Democratic Reform cleared the way for the modernization of Tibet. In 1951, when Tibet was liberated peacefully, in consideration of the special history and reality of Tibet the "17-Article Agreement" affirmed the necessity of reforming the social system of Tibet and, at the same time, adopted a prudent attitude toward the reform. It stipulated that "the local government of Tibet shall carry out reform voluntarily, and, when the people demand a reform, shall settle it through consultation with the Tibetan leaders." However, some people in the Tibetan ruling group were totally opposed to reform and raised a hue and cry about their determination never to carry it out, in order to perpetuate the feudal serf system. Faced with the Tibetan people's ever-stronger demand for a democratic reform, instead of following the popular will they ganged up with overseas anti-China forces and raised an armed rebellion on March 10, 1959, in an attempt to split Tibet from the motherland and seek "independence" for Tibet. In order to safeguard the unity of the nation and the basic interests of the Tibetan people, the Central People's Government took decisive measures to suppress the rebellion together with the Tibetan people, and carried out the Democratic Reform of the Tibetan social system.
民主改革废除了封建农奴主土地所有制及农奴和奴隶对封建农奴主的人身依附关系，废止了旧西藏法典及其野蛮刑罚，废除了政教合一制度和寺庙的封建特权，使百万农奴和奴隶在政治、经济和精神上得到了翻身解放，成为土地和其他生产资料的主人，获得了人身自由和宗教信仰的自由，实现了做人的权利，极大地解放了社会生产力，也为西藏的现代化发展开辟了道路。据统计，农奴和奴隶在民主改革中共分得土地280多万克；到1960年民主改革基本完成时，西藏全区的粮食总产量比1959年增长12.6%，比民主改革前的1958年增长17.7%；牲畜存栏头数1960年比1959年增长9.9%。
The Democratic Reform abolished the feudal serf-owners' right to own land and the serfs and slaves' personal bondage to the feudal serf-owners, repealed the old Tibetan laws and barbarous punishments, and annulled the theocratic system and the feudal privileges of the clergy. The reform liberated Tibet's million serfs and slaves politically, economically and spiritually, making them masters of the land and other means of production, giving them personal and religious freedom, and realizing their human rights. The reform greatly liberated the social productive forces in Tibet, and opened up the road toward modernization. According to statistics, the former serfs and slaves got over 2.8 million kai of land in the Democratic Reform and, in 1960, when the Democratic Reform was basically completed, the total grain yield for the whole of Tibet was 12.6 percent higher than in 1959 and 17.7 percent higher than in 1958, before the Democratic Reform. Moreover, the total amount of livestock was 9.9 percent higher than in 1959.
民族区域自治的实行为西藏的现代化发展提供了强有力的制度保证。民主改革以后，西藏人民与全国各族人民一样，享有了宪法和法律规定的一切政治权利。1961年，西藏各地开始实行普选，昔日的农奴和奴隶第一次获得了当家作主的民主权利。他们踊跃参加选举，并由此产生了自治区各级权力机关和政府。一大批翻身农奴和奴隶担任了自治区各级领导职务。1965年9月，西藏第一届人民代表大会成功召开，西藏自治区及其人民政府正式宣告成立。西藏自治区的建立和民族区域自治制度的实行，从制度上确保了各民族平等、团结、互助和共同繁荣政策在西藏的实现，保障了西藏人民平等参与管理国家事务以及自主管理本地区和本民族事务的权利，从而为西藏在国家的特殊支持和帮助下根据本地民族特色实现与全国共同发展提供了制度保证。
The implementation of regional ethnic autonomy provided a firm institutional guarantee for the modernization of Tibet. After the Democratic Reform, the Tibetan people, like people of all other ethnic groups throughout China, enjoyed all the political rights provided by the Constitution and law. In 1961, a general election was held all over Tibet. For the first time, the former serfs and slaves were able to enjoy democratic rights as their own masters, and actively participated in the election of power organs and governments at all levels in the region. Many emancipated serfs and slaves took up leading posts at various levels in the region. In September 1965, the First People's Congress of Tibet was successfully convened, at which the founding of the Tibet Autonomous Region and the Regional People's Government was officially proclaimed. The founding of the Tibet Autonomous Region and the implementation of regional ethnic autonomy institutionally ensured the realization of the policy of equality, unity, mutual help and common prosperity among all ethnic groups in the region, and guaranteed the Tibetan people's right to equal participation in the administration of state affairs as well as the right to independent administration of local and ethnic affairs. In this way, an institutional guarantee was provided for Tibet to develop along with the other parts of China, with special support and assistance by the state and according to its local characteristics.
改革开放为西藏的现代化发展注入了强大动力。二十世纪八十年代，西藏和全国一样掀起改革开放和现代化建设热潮。为推动西藏的发展，中央政府制定了“土地归户使用，自主经营，长期不变”、“牲畜归户，私有私养，自主经营，长期不变”等一系列有利于西藏经济发展的特殊优惠政策，推进了西藏经济体制改革和对外开放，并从1984年起由国家投资、全国九省（市）援建西藏43项工程等一批项目。改革开放政策的实施和国家的支援，壮大和繁荣了西藏的工业、农牧业和以商贸、饮食、旅游为主的第三产业，提高了西藏产业整体水平和经济活动的商品化水平，使西藏经济和社会发展跨上了一个新的台阶。
The policy of reform and opening-up gave a powerful impetus to the modernization of Tibet. The 1980s witnessed a great upsurge of the reform, opening-up and modernization drive in Tibet, as in the other parts of China. To promote the development of Tibet, the Central Government formulated a series of special favorable policies, such as "long-term right to use and independently operate land by individual households" and "long-term policy of individual households' ownership, raising and management of livestock." These policies promoted the reform of the economic system and opening-up in Tibet. Since 1984, 43 projects have been launched in Tibet with state investment and aid from nine provinces and municipalities. The implementation of the policy of reform and opening-up and the state aid have strengthened and invigorated Tibetan industry, agriculture, animal husbandry and the tertiary industry with trade, catering and tourism as its mainstays, raised the overall level of industries and the level of commercialization of economic activities in Tibet, and helped Tibet take another step forward in its economic and social development.
中央政府关心西藏、全国各地支援西藏的战略决策使西藏的现代化建设进入了快速发展的新阶段。1994年，中央政府召开第三次西藏工作座谈会，确立了以经济建设为中心，紧紧抓住发展经济和稳定局势两件大事，确保西藏经济的加快发展，确保社会的全面进步和长治久安，确保人民生活水平的不断提高的新时期西藏工作指导方针。作出了中央政府关心西藏、全国各地支援西藏的重大决策，制定了一系列加快西藏发展的特殊优惠政策和措施，从而形成了国家直接投资西藏建设项目、中央政府实行财政补贴、全国进行对口支援的全方位支援西藏现代化建设的格局。1994年以来，中央政府直接投资建设了62项工程，总投资达48.6亿元；15个对口支援省（市）和中央各部委也无偿援建了716个项目，资金投入达31.6亿元；全国先后派出援藏干部1900多名，这些都极大地改善了西藏的生产和生活条件，促进了西藏经济和社会的发展。与此同时，西藏全面推进经济体制和科技体制改革，调整经济结构和企业经营管理机制，建立健全社会保障体系，扩大开放领域，积极鼓励和吸引国内外的社会资金参与西藏的经济建设，使多种所有制经济得到长足发展，增强了西藏发展的内在活力。2001年6月，中央政府召开第四次西藏工作座谈会，为西藏在新世纪全面实现现代化规划了宏伟的蓝图，并决定采取更加有力的政策措施，进一步加大对西藏现代化发展的支持力度。 中央政府关心、全国各地支援和西藏各族人民的努力，使西藏经济实现了加快发展，人民生活水平得到了普遍提高，现代化发展呈现出前所未有的勃勃生机。据统计，1994年至2000年，西藏全区国内生产总值增长了1.3倍，年均增长12.4%，改变了长期低于全国平均发展速度的状况；城镇居民人均可支配收入和农牧民人均收入分别增长62.9%和93.6%；贫困人口由二十世纪九十年代初的48万人减少到7万多人。
The modernization drive in Tibet has entered the new stage of rapid development with the strategic decision of the Central Government to accord special attention to Tibet and get all the other parts of China to aid Tibet. In 1994, the Central Government held the Third Forum on Work in Tibet, and set the guiding principles for work in the region in the new era as follows: Focusing efforts on economic construction, firmly grasping the two major tasks of developing the economy and stabilizing the situation, securing the high-speed development of the economy, overall social progress and lasting political stability in Tibet, and ensuring continuous improvement of the Tibetan people's living standards. At the forum, the Central Government also adopted the important decision to devote special attention to Tibet and get all the other parts of China to aid Tibet, and formulated a sequence of special favorable policies and measures for speeding up the development of Tibet. The forum formed a mechanism for all-round aid to the modernization of Tibet, by which the state would directly invest in construction projects in the region, the Central Government provide financial subsidies, and the other parts of the country provide counterpart aid. Since 1994, the Central Government has directly invested a total of 4.86 billion yuan in 62 projects; 15 provinces and municipalities and the various ministries and commissions under the State Council have also given aid gratis for the construction of 716 projects, contributing a total of 3.16 billion yuan; and over 1,900 cadres have been sent from all over the country to assist in Tibet's construction. As a result, the production and living conditions in Tibet have been greatly improved and its social and economic developments revved up. In the meantime, Tibet has promoted all-round reform in its economic and technological systems, adjusted its economic structure and mechanism of enterprise operation and management, set up a complete social security system, enlarged its scope of opening-up, and actively encouraged and attracted funds from both home and abroad for its economic construction. In this way, the economy with diverse forms of ownership has developed rapidly, and Tibet's inner vitality for growth has been strengthened. In June 2001, the Central Government held the Fourth Forum on Work in Tibet, at which it drew up an ambitious blueprint for Tibet's overall modernization in the new century, and decided to adopt more effective policies and measures to further strengthen the support for the modernization of Tibet. With attention from the Central Government, aid from the other parts of the country and the efforts of people of all ethnic groups in Tibet, the development of the region's economy has been speeded up, the people's living standards have been greatly improved, and the modernization drive is vibrant with life as never before. According to statistics, from 1994 to 2000, the gross domestic product (GDP) in Tibet increased by 130 percent, or a yearly increase of 12.4 percent, changing the situation in which Tibet had lagged behind the other parts of China in the GDP growth rate for a long time in the past. Urban residents' disposable income per capita and the farmers and herdsmen's income per capita increased by 62.9 percent and 93.6 percent, respectively; and the impoverished population decreased from 480,000 in the early 1990s to just over 70,000.

综上所述，西藏和平解放五十年来的发展史，是由黑暗走向光明、由落后走向进步、由贫穷走向富裕、由封闭走向开放的历史，是一部在祖国大家庭中不断走向现代化的历史。
To sum up, the development history of Tibet in the past five decades since its peaceful liberation has been one of proceeding from darkness to brightness, from backwardness to progressiveness, from poverty to prosperity and from isolation to openness, and of the region marching toward modernization as a part of the big family of China.

西藏现代化的发展成果　
 Tibet's Modernization Achievements　
五十年来，在中央政府的领导和全国人民的支援下，经过西藏各族人民不懈努力，西藏在现代化发展的道路上不断前进，取得了举世瞩目的辉煌成就。
In the past 50 years, thanks to the leadership of the Central Government, the aid of the whole nation and the unremitting efforts of the people of all ethnic groups in the region, Tibet has kept marching forward along the road to modernization and made significant achievements that have attracted worldwide attention.
经济发展实现了重大飞跃。五十年来，西藏在经济制度、经济结构上发生了巨大变化，经济总量上实现了巨大飞跃，彻底告别了封闭的庄园制自然经济，正在向现代市场经济迈进。2000年，全区国内生产总值达到117.46亿元，比1995年翻一番，比1990年翻两番，相当于和平解放前的30余倍。经济结构趋于合理，第一产业在国内生产总值中的比重从五十年前的99%下降到30.9%，第二、三产业比重分别上升至23.2%和45.9%。
-The economy has progressed significantly. During the past 50 years, Tibet has witnessed tremendous changes in its economic system and economic structure and significant progress in its aggregate economic volume. Having thoroughly eliminated the former closed, natural economy based on the manorial system, Tibet is fast on its way toward a modern market economy. In 2000, the region's GDP reached 11.746 billion yuan, twice as much as in 1995, four times as much as in 1990, and over 30 times as much as in the pre-peaceful liberation period. The economic structure is becoming more and more rational. The primary industry accounted for 30.9 percent in the GDP, as against 99 percent 50 years ago, and the proportions of the secondary and tertiary industries rose to 23.2 percent and 45.9 percent, respectively.
现代工业从无到有，逐渐成为带动西藏地区经济快速发展的重要支柱。迄今已经建立起包括能源、轻工、纺织、机械、森工、采矿、建材、化工、制药、印刷、食品加工等20多个门类，富有西藏地方特色的现代工业体系，培育出拉萨啤酒、奇正藏药、珠峰摩托等一批全国知名的企业品牌。到2000年，西藏拥有乡及乡以上企业482家，全区第二产业增加值达到27.21亿元。
Modern industry, having grown from nothing, has gradually become an important pillar of the rapid economic development in Tibet. So far, over 20 branches of the industry have been set up, including energy, light industry, textiles, machine building, lumbering, mining, building materials, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, printing and foodstuff processing. This modern industrial system with Tibetan characteristics has produced some nationally famous brand names, such as Lhasa Beer, Qizheng Tibetan Medicine and Zhufeng Motorcycles. By 2000, Tibet had 482 enterprises at and above the township level and the added value of its secondary industry reached 2.721 billion yuan.
能源、交通等基础产业蓬勃兴起。电力发展迅速，形成了以水电为主，地热、风能、太阳能等多能互补的新型能源体系。到2000年，全区共有各类电站401座，总装机容量达到35.62万千瓦，年发电量达到6.61亿千瓦时，与和平解放前仅有一座125千瓦、只供少数上层贵族享受、断续发电的小电站相比，简直是天壤之别。以公路运输为主，航空、管道运输协调发展的立体交通运输网络已经形成，结束了旧西藏连一条公路都没有的历史。现已建成以拉萨为中心，以青藏、川藏、新藏、滇藏和中尼公路为骨架，包括15条干线公路、375条支线公路，四通八达的公路网，公路总里程达到2.25万公里，基本实现了县县通公路，80%以上的乡通上了公路。现已拥有拉萨贡噶、昌都邦达两个民用机场，开辟了拉萨至北京、成都、重庆、西安、西宁、上海、云南迪庆、昆明、香港和尼泊尔加德满都等国内国际航线。建成了总长为1080公里、世界上海拔最高的格尔木至拉萨输油管道，目前承担着西藏80%以上的油料运输。青藏铁路已于2001年6月开工建设，在不远的将来，西藏就要结束没有铁路的历史。
Basic industries, such as energy and transportation, have thrived. Power industry has developed rapidly, and a new energy system has been formed, with hydropower as the mainstay backed up by supplementary energy sources such as geothermal power, wind energy and solar energy. By 2000, there were 401 power plants in Tibet, with a total installed capacity of 356,200 kw and an annual energy output of 661 million kwh-a world of difference from before the peaceful liberation, when there was only one 125-kw power plant, which worked irregularly and supplied electricity only to a handful of aristocrats. Putting an end to the history of Tibet having not a single highway, a three-dimensional transportation system is now in place, with highway transportation as the major part, and air and pipeline transportation developing in coordination. A highway network now extends in all directions with Lhasa as the center, including such trunk roads as the Qinghai-Tibet, Sichuan-Tibet, Xinjiang-Tibet, Yunnan-Tibet and China-Nepal highways and 15 main highways and 375 branch highways. These roads total 22,500 km, and reach every county and over 80 percent of the townships in the region. The two civil airports in Tibet, Gonggar Airport in Lhasa and Bamda Airport in Qamdo, operate domestic and international routes from Lhasa to Beijing, Chengdu, Chongqing, Xi'an, Xining, Shanghai, Deqen and Kunming in Yunnan Province, Hong Kong, and Kathmandu of Nepal. Meanwhile, a 1,080-km petroleum pipeline has been built from Golmud in Qinghai Province to Lhasa, the highest-altitude pipeline in the world. It carries over 80 percent of petroleum transported in the region. In June 2001, work started on the Qinghai-Tibet Railway, and the days when the region was in accessible by rail will be gone for good in the foreseeable future.
第三产业已成为西藏第一大产业。现代商业、旅游、邮电、饮食服务、文化娱乐、IT等在旧西藏闻所未闻的新兴产业迅猛发展。通信事业实现了超前发展，形成了以拉萨为中心、覆盖全区，由光缆、卫星传输，集程控交换、卫星通信、数字通信、移动通信于一体，达到当代先进水平的通信网络。2000年，西藏邮电业务总量完成3.84亿元，业务收入完成1.23亿元，分别是1978年的179倍和1086倍，二十多年间年平均增长速度分别达到26.6%和24.3%。2000年底，西藏全区固定电话总装机容量达到17.02万门，用户装机11.11万部；移动电话总装机容量达到12.3万门，用户达到7.23万户；互联网站9家，互联网用户4513户。到2000年，第三产业增加值达到53.93亿元，在西藏国内生产总值构成中居于首位。
Tertiary industry has become the largest industrial sector in Tibet. Such new industries as modern commerce, tourism, postal services, catering, entertainment and information technology, unknown in old Tibet, have grown by leaps and bounds. Telecommunications have developed particularly speedily, and an advanced modern telecommunications network covering the whole of Tibet has taken shape, with Lhasa as the center, and including cable and satellite transmission together with program-controlled switching systems, digital and mobile communications. In 2000, Tibet Telecom business totaled 384 million yuan-worth and its income was 123 million yuan, 179 times and 1,086 times the 1978 figures, respectively, and on average increasing by 26.6 percent and 24.3 percent respectively each year over the past 22 years. By the end of 2000, the total installed capacity of fixed telephones reached 170,200, and 111,100 telephones were installed. The total installed capacity of mobile telephones has reached 123,000, with 72,300 mobile telephone users. There are also nine Internet websites and 4,513 users. By 2000, the added value of the tertiary industry had reached 5.393 billion yuan, the highest among all the constituents of the region's GDP.
农牧业生产方式发生根本转变，生产力水平和生产效益大幅度提高。和平解放以来，国家投巨资兴建农田水利基本设施，大力进行以“一江两河”（雅鲁藏布江和拉萨河、年楚河）中部流域综合开发为代表的大批农牧业基础项目，极大地改善了西藏农牧业的生产条件，农牧民靠天吃饭、养畜的生产生活方式正在成为历史。包括科学施肥、育种、品种改良、病虫害防治以及科学养畜、畜群调整等一系列农牧业科技措施得到推广普及，农业机械化程度和生产效率得到很大提高，农牧业生产开始向现代化方向迈进。到2000年，西藏第一产业增加值已经达到36.32亿元，粮食总产量达到96.22万吨，牲畜存栏数为2266万头（只），基本实现粮食、油类自给，人均占有肉、奶量高于全国平均水平。
The mode of production in agriculture and animal husbandry has changed radically, and the productivity and production returns have risen greatly. Since the peaceful liberation, the state has invested heavily in water conservancy works, and put great efforts into a number of capital construction projects for agriculture and animal husbandry, especially in the comprehensive development of the middle reaches of the Yarlungzangbo, Lhasa and Nyangqu rivers. These endeavors have greatly improved the agricultural and animal husbandry production conditions in Tibet, and are changing the Tibetan peasants and herdsmen's traditional lifestyles of living at the mercy of the elements. A series of agricultural and stockbreeding technologies have been spread widely, including scientific fertilization, improvement of breeds, pest control and stock-raising. The mechanization of agriculture and production efficiency have both improved by a large margin, and farming and animal husbandry are advancing along the line of modernization. By 2000, the added value of the primary industry in Tibet had reached 3.632 billion yuan, the total grain yield had reached 962,200 tons, the total amount of livestock had come to 22.66 million head, self-sufficiency in grains and edible oils had been basically realized, and the distribution of meat and milk per capita had risen above the national average.
城市化水平不断提高。旧西藏处于自然经济状态，缺乏城市发展的动力，城镇数量少、规模小，人口最多的拉萨不过3万多人，其他人口规模较大的地方也都不过是几千人的较大村落而已，算不上城市。即使是拉萨，也不具备健全的城市运行体系，市政设施几乎没有，城市功能低下。如今，西藏城市规模伴随产业升级不断扩张，到2000年，西藏有建制市2个，县、区72个，建制镇112个，城镇人口49.11万人，城镇面积达到147平方公里。城镇综合功能不断完善，城市道路、供水、治安、社区服务等已经形成完整的体系，基本满足了市民生活和城市经济自身发展的需要。市容市貌、环境保护正朝着现代化方向迈进，城市公共绿地面积达到人均10.27平方米,绿化覆盖率达到24.4%，城市环境指数居全国首位。以拉萨为中心、辐射各地的城镇发展群体已经在西藏形成。以城镇为核心、带动周边区域经济发展、城乡结合共同发展的经济格局正在形成。
-The level of urbanization has constantly improved.With its natural economy old Tibet lacked the dynamics of urban development and had only a few small cities and towns. Lhasa, the most populous urban center, had a population of just over 30,000. Other places with comparatively large populations were big villages rather than cities, each having only a few thousand residents. Even Lhasa lacked a sound urban operating mechanism of any sort and had scarcely any of the amenities of a proper city. At present, the urban scale of Tibet is expanding constantly together with industrial growth. By 2000, there were two organic cities in Tibet, 72 counties and districts and 112 organic towns. Moreover, the urban population totaled 491,100, and the total urban area was 147 sq m. The comprehensive functions of the cities and towns have improved steadily, and complete systems have taken shape in various fields, such as roads, water supply, public security and community services, basically satisfying the needs of the lives of the urban residents and the economic development of the cities. Tibet is now marching toward modernization in urban appearance and environmental protection. Its urban environmental index now ranks first in the country-the per capita area of its urban public lawns has reached 10.27 sq m, with a greenbelt coverage of 24.4 percent. Urban development groups radiating from Lhasa have come into existence in Tibet, while efforts are being made to form an economic pattern centered on cities and towns to promote economic development in neighboring areas and stimulate mutual development through the integration of urban and rural areas.
对外开放成效显著。改革开放推动西藏商业、对外贸易和旅游产业空前发展，增强了与内地、与世界的相互联系和合作。西藏地方的区域市场体系初步形成，与全国乃至世界市场体系正在逐步实现接轨。大量农牧民走出乡村，投入市场经济大潮，下海经商。来自全国和世界各地的商品源源不断地进入西藏，丰富着城乡市场和百姓生活。西藏的名、优、特产品及民族手工业产品，大量进入全国和世界市场。商业贸易的蓬勃发展，推动了农牧产品加工业的发展，农牧业生产开始向市场化方向迈进。国家制定了一系列优惠政策，鼓励和吸引国内外企业到西藏投资办企业，扩大对内对外经济交流与合作。近五年来，西藏协议利用外资1.25亿美元。到2000年，全区进出口总额已经达到1.3亿美元，其中出口总额1.13亿美元。
-Remarkable achievements have been made in opening up.The policy of reform and opening-up has promoted the unprecedented development of Tibet's commerce, foreign trade and tourism, and strengthened its interrelations and cooperation with the inland areas and the rest of the world. The regional market system has taken initial shape, and is gradually being integrated into the market system of the whole country and even that of the world. A great number of farmers and herdsmen have become businessmen, throwing themselves into the mainstream of the market economy. Commodities from other parts of the country and the world are flowing into Tibet in a continuous stream to enrich both the urban and rural markets and the lives of the local people. A great quantity of Tibetan famous-brand products, and special local products and handicrafts have entered the domestic and international markets. The flourishing of commerce and trade has given a powerful impetus to the development of the farm and stockbreeding products processing industry and, as a result, agriculture and animal husbandry are heading toward marketization. The state has formulated a series of preferential policies to encourage domestic and foreign enterprises to invest in enterprises in Tibet, and expand both domestic and international economic exchanges and cooperation. Tibet has attained the contractual value of US$ 125 million in overseas investment over the past five years. By 2000, its total imports and exports had reached US$ 130 million-worth, of which the total export value came to US$ 113 million.
   “世界屋脊”独特的自然风光和人文景观，吸引着众多的国内外游客，进藏旅游已经成为一条黄金旅游线路。2000年，西藏接待国内外游客达59.83万人次，其中，海外旅游人数14.89万人；旅游直接收入7.8亿元，间接收入29.8亿元，分别占全区国内生产总值的6.6%和25.38%。
The "roof of the world" has become one of China's most popular tourist destinations, attracting numerous tourists from both home and abroad with its unique natural views and places of cultural interest. In 2000, Tibet received a total of 598,300 tourists from both home and abroad, of whom 148,900 were overseas tourists, earning a direct income of 780 million yuan, and an indirect income of 2.98 billion yuan, accounting for 6.6 percent and 25.38 percent of the region's GDP, respectively.
环境与经济协调发展。西藏生态环境脆弱，大规模开发建设势必给生态环境带来巨大压力。改革开放以来，中央政府和西藏地方政府始终坚持可持续发展战略，把环境保护与经济建设作为一个整体进行同步规划和实施，确保工程项目的论证、设计、施工建设和运营使用都要充分考虑生态环境保护，促进了环境与经济的协调发展。西藏制定和实施了《环境保护条例》、《地质矿产资源管理条例》以及与国家《土地管理法》、《水法》、《水土保持法》、《草原法》、《野生动物保护法》等法律相配套的实施办法和细则，形成了有效的环境保护和污染治理的监督管理体制，使全区的大部分森林、江河、湖泊、草场、湿地、冰川、雪山和野生动植物等得到了较好的保护，水、气环境质量保持了比较良好的状态。西藏先后建成了羌塘、珠峰、雅鲁藏布大峡谷等18个国家级和省级自然保护区，其面积占全国自然保护区总面积的一半，对保护和改善脆弱的高原生态环境起到了重要作用。近年来，西藏先后投资5000多万元对拉萨啤酒厂、羊八井电厂、拉萨皮革厂、自治区人民医院、拉萨水泥厂等企事业的废水、废气进行了治理，有效地改善了城市环境和区域水环境质量。1991年以来，西藏在“一江两河”地区累计投资9亿元实施开发项目，通过兴修农田水利、改良草场、改造中低产田和大面积成片植树造林，在防治水土流失和沙漠化治理等方面发挥了积极作用，取得了明显的社会、经济和环境协调发展的综合效益。环境评估指数表明，西藏生态基本上还处在原生状态，是全国环境状况最好的地区。随着国家西部大开发战略的实施和中央政府第四次西藏工作座谈会精神的落实，西藏正在加大对生态环境的保护力度，计划到本世纪中叶投资227亿元、建设160个重点生态保护建设项目，使西藏生态环境进一步得到保护和改善。
-Environmental and economic development has progressed in coordination.Large-scale development and construction will be certain to bring enormous pressure to bear on the fragile ecological environment of Tibet. Since the initiation of the policy of reform and opening-up, the Central Government and the local government of Tibet have consistently adhered to the strategy of sustainable development, simultaneously planning and implementing environmental protection and economic construction as an integral whole, to guarantee that the demonstration, design, construction and operation of engineering projects would give full consideration to eco-environmental protection to promote coordinated environmental and economic development. The "Regulations on Environmental Protection" and the "Regulations on the Administration of Geological and Mineral Resources" have been formulated and implemented in Tibet, to form a complete system together with such state laws as the "Agrarian Management Law," "Water Law," "Law on Water and Soil Conservation," "Grassland Law" and "Law on the Protection of Wildlife." Now, with the introduction of an effective supervision and management system for environmental protection and pollution control, most of the forests, rivers, lakes, pastures, wetlands, glaciers, snow mountains and wild animals and plants in the region are well protected, and the water, air and environmental quality is excellent. Eighteen nature reserves at the national and provincial levels have been established, including those in Changtang, Mount Qomolangma and the Yarlungzangbo Grand Canyon, whose combined area accounts for half of the total area of China's nature reserves, playing an important role in the protection and improvement of the fragile plateau eco-environment. Over the past few years, Tibet has invested over 50 million yuan in the control of waste water and gas at enterprises and institutions such as the Lhasa Brewery, Yangbajain Power Plant, Lhasa Leather Plant, People's Hospital of the Autonomous Region and Lhasa Cement Plant, effectively improving the urban environment and the quality of the region's water. Since 1991, Tibet has invested a total of 900 million yuan in carrying out the development projects in the areas of the Yarlungzangbo, Lhasa and Nyangqu rivers, playing an active role in the prevention and control of soil erosion and the halting of desertification through the construction of water conservancy works, the improvement of pastures, the amelioration of medium- and low-yield fields, and large-scale afforestation, achieving remarkable comprehensive benefits for coordinated social, economic and environmental development. According to the environmental evaluation indices, Tibet's ecology, which basically remains in its primordial condition, is the best in China in terms of environmental conditions. With the implementation of the state's strategy of large-scale development of the western region and the carrying out of the essential points of the Fourth Forum of the Central Government on Work in Tibet, the region is strengthening its eco-environmental protection and planning to invest 22.7 billion yuan and launch 160 key projects for ecological protection by the mid-21st century to further protect and improve its ecological environment.
教育、科技和医疗卫生事业迅速发展。旧西藏没有一所现代意义上的学校，寺庙垄断着教育，适龄儿童入学率不到2%，青壮年文盲率高达95%。如今，教育得到广泛普及，广大人民群众享有了接受教育的权利。国家投入巨资兴办教育事业，一个涵盖普通教育、幼儿教育、成人教育、职业教育、特殊教育的比较完整的教育体系已经形成。到2000年，全区拥有各类学校956所，在校学生达到38.11万人，适龄儿童入学率已提高到85.8%，文盲率下降到32.5%，大专以上学历人口达到3.3万人,占全区总人口的12.6‰，高于全国平均水平，位居前列。西藏不仅有了自己的硕士、博士，而且有了一批享誉全国的专家、学者。
-Rapid progress has been made in education, science and technology, and medical and health care.In old Tibet there was not a single school in the modern sense, and education was monopolized by monasteries. The enrollment ratio of school-age children was less than two percent, and the illiteracy rate of the young and middle-aged people reached 95 percent. But now, education has been widely popularized, and the broad masses of the people enjoy the right to receive education. The state has invested enormously in developing education, and a complete education system is now in place, covering regular education, preschool education, adult education, vocational education and special education. By 2000, Tibet had set up 956 schools of all kinds, with a total enrollment of 381,100 students; the enrollment ratio of school-age children had increased to 85.8 percent; the illiteracy rate had declined to 32.5 percent; and 33,000 persons had received education above the junior college level, accounting for 12.6 per thousand of the region's total population and higher than the average national level. Now Tibet not only boasts its own master's and doctorate degree holders, but also a number of nationally renowned experts and scholars.
现代科学技术从无到有、发展迅速。和平解放前，西藏没有一家现代科研机构，即使天文历算这样的应用技术，也被罩上一层神秘的宗教外衣，垄断在寺院手中。半个世纪以来，中央政府和西藏地方政府高度重视科学研究和科学技术的普及、应用，逐步建立了25个科研院所，现有专业科技人员3.5万人，学科领域涉及历史、经济、人口、语言、宗教和农业、畜牧、林业、生态、生物、藏医药、盐湖、地热、太阳能等数十个门类。其中，藏学、高原生态、藏医药等学科研究在全国处于领先水平，产生了一批有世界影响的学术成果。
Growing out of nothing, modern science and technology have been developing rapidly. There was no modern scientific research institute in Tibet before its peaceful liberation, and even such applied technology as astronomy and calendrical calculation were monopolized by the monasteries behind a mysterious religious facade. Attaching great importance to scientific research and the popularization and application of science and technology, the Central Government and the local government of Tibet have set up 25 scientific research institutes over the past half century, employing 35,000 professional scientific and technical personnel in disciplines such as history, economics, population, linguistics and religion, and dozens of sectors such as agriculture, animal husbandry, forestry, ecology, biology, Tibetan medicine and pharmacology, salt lakes, geo-thermal and solar energy, among which studies in Tibetology, plateau ecology, Tibetan medicine and pharmacology take the lead in the country. Besides, a number of academic achievements made in Tibet are of worldwide influence.
医疗卫生事业蓬勃发展。旧西藏除了由封建贵族和寺院垄断的传统藏医藏药以外，极度缺医少药，百姓生病既没有钱，也没有地方看病治病。现在的西藏已经建成了中、西、藏医结合，以拉萨为中心、遍布城乡的医疗卫生网。独具民族特色的藏医藏药已走向全国，逐渐为全国人民所喜爱，并正在走向世界。到2000年，全区医疗卫生机构已经发展到1237个，病床床位达到6348张，专业卫生队伍达到8948人，每千人拥有病床和卫生技术人员数高于全国平均水平。目前，西藏农村合作医疗覆盖率达到80%，儿童计划免疫合格率达到97%。缺医少药状况得到根本改变，人民群众的健康水平大幅度提高。在旧西藏常流行的天花、霍乱、性病、斑疹、伤寒、猩红热、破伤风等各类传染病、地方病的发病率降至8‰，其中有的已经绝迹；孕产妇死亡率由1959年的50‰下降到7‰左右，婴儿死亡率由430‰下降到6.61‰；人均预期寿命则由二十世纪五十年代的35.5岁增加到67岁。旧西藏人口增长缓慢，在五十年代以前的二百多年间，人口长期徘徊在100万人左右（据中国清朝政府1734年至1736年的户口调查，当时的西藏人口为94.12万人；1953年以达赖为首的西藏地方政府申报的西藏人口为100万人，二百年间仅增约5.8万人），而民主改革四十多年来，西藏人口已增加到2000年的259.83万人，增长了1.6倍多。
Medical and health care has grown vigorously. In the old days, when traditional Tibetan medicine was monopolized by feudal nobles and monasteries, the region was extremely short of doctors and medicine, and most sick people lacked both money for medical care and access to doctors. Now a medical and health network has been established in Tibet, integrated with traditional Chinese, Western and Tibetan medicines, covering all the cities and villages in the region, with Lhasa as the center. Tibetan medicine and pharmacology, with unique ethnic features, are promoted all over China and abroad. By 2000, the medical and health organizations in the region had increased to 1,237, with 6,348 beds and 8,948 professionals. The numbers of hospital beds and health workers available per thousand people in Tibet exceeded the national average level. At present, the cooperative medical service program covers 80 percent of the Tibetan rural areas, and 97 percent of children have been immunized against epidemic diseases. There is no longer any lack of medicine, and the level of the Tibetan people's health has improved substantially. The incidence of various infectious and endemic diseases prevalent in old Tibet, such as smallpox, cholera, venereal diseases, macula, typhoid fever, scarlet fever and tetanus, has declined to eight per thousand, and some of the diseases have been wiped out. The childbirth mortality rate has dropped from 50 per thousand in 1959 to approximately seven per thousand; and the infant mortality rate, from 430 to 6.61 per thousand. The average life expectancy of the people has increased from 35.5 years in the 1950s to the present 67 years. The population of old Tibet had increased rather slowly; over the 200-odd years before the 1950s, it had fluctuated at around one million. (According to the census of the Qing Dynasty government from 1734 to 1736, Tibet had a population of 941,200, and the population reported by the Tibetan local government headed by the Dalai Lama in 1953 was one million, an increase of only 58,000 in 200 years.) However, over the 40-odd years since the Democratic Reform, Tibet's population had increased to 2.5983 million by 2000, or an increase of more than 160 percent.
体育事业得到长足发展。西藏建成了一批符合国际标准和规范的体育运动设施，具有西藏地方特色的运动形式得到挖掘、规范和推广，一批传统体育项目走出西藏，成为全国性的体育竞赛项目。一批优秀运动员在全国各类体育运动项目和竞技比赛中取得优异成绩，尤其是登山运动一直居于全国领先水平。1999年，西藏和首都北京一起，共同举办了全国第六届民族运动会，使西藏的体育运动水平进一步得到了提高。
　Considerable achievements have been made in sports. A number of sports facilities up to the international standards have been built in Tibet, and traditional Tibetan sports have been revived, standardized and popularized, some of them even having been included in national competitions. Some excellent athletes from Tibet have scored outstanding achievements in various national sports games and competitions, and in mountain climbing in particular Tibetans have always taken the lead in the country. In 1999, the Sixth National Ethnic Games were held jointly by Tibet and Beijing, further improving the level of Tibetan sports.
传统优秀文化得到发掘、保护和发展。国家投入巨资和大量的黄金、白银，用于西藏重点文物单位的维修和保护工作，布达拉宫、大昭寺已被联合国教科文组织列入世界文化遗产。国家重点支持的藏文《大藏经》（甘珠尔、丹珠尔）校勘项目已经完成。有西藏古代社会“百科全书”之称的苯教《大藏经》得到了系统整理，并全部出版。民间口头零散流传下来的《格萨尔王传》，共达200多部，被称为“东方荷马史诗”，在国家大力支持下，经过几十年的不懈努力，共收集手抄、木刻本300多部，陆续整理出版藏文本70多部、汉译本20多部，另有若干部已译成英、日、法文出版。民间流行的歌谣、舞蹈、戏曲、故事等艺术表现形式，通过整理和创新，赋予更高的表现手段，登上大雅之堂。国家投资建成了西藏博物馆、图书馆、展览馆、电影院等一大批功能齐全、设备先进的文化娱乐设施，结束了旧西藏基本没有文化娱乐设施的历史。到2000年，全区共有各级群众艺术馆、文化馆（站）400多个，有以自治区歌舞团、藏戏团、话剧团为主的各类专业文艺演出团体25个，群众性业余演出团体160多个，县乌兰牧骑演出队17个，满足了广大群众的文化娱乐需求。
-The fine aspects of traditional Tibetan culture have been explored, protected and developed. The state has invested a huge amount of capital, gold and silver in the maintenance and protection of the key historical monuments in Tibet. The Potala Palace and Jokhang Temple have been included in UNESCO's World Cultural Heritage List. The collation of the Tibetan-language Tripitaka (Gangyur and Tengyur) has been completed. Known as an "encyclopedia" of ancient Tibet, the Bonist Tripitaka has been sorted out in a systematic way and published in its entirety. The Life of King Gesar, which had been handed down orally for centuries, has reached the grand total of more than 200 volumes. Thanks to the great support of the state and unremitting efforts in the past few decades, more than 300 handwritten and block-printed copies of this "Homeric epic of the East" have been collected, of which more than 70 volumes have been published in the Tibetan language, over 20 volumes in the Chinese language, and several volumes in English, Japanese and French. Folk songs, dances, dramas, tales and other forms of artistic expression have been refined and imbued with new ideas and higher forms of expression for enjoyment by the general public. The state has invested in the construction of a large number of cultural and recreational facilities with complete functions and advanced facilities in Tibet, such as museums, libraries, exhibition halls and cinemas, in sharp contrast to the old days when Tibet almost had no cultural and recreational facilities to speak of. By 2000, the Tibet Autonomous Region had more than 400 public cultural centers, more than 25 professional theatrical troupes of various kinds, such as the Song and Dance Ensemble, Tibetan Opera Troupe and Modern Drama Troupe of the Tibet Autonomous Region, more than 160 amateur performance troupes, and 17 itinerant performance troupes at the county level. They can meet the demands of the broad masses of the people for cultural entertainment.
藏民族特性和传统得到尊重和科学继承。西藏自治区依法有权根据本地的政治、经济和文化特点，决定本地的事务，制定相关法规，有权报经批准后变通执行或者停止执行上级国家机关的有关决议。1965年以来，自治区人民代表大会及其常务委员会已制定、颁布地方性法规160多部，内容涉及政权建设、经济发展、文化教育、语言文字、文物保护、野生动物和自然资源保护等各个方面，有效地保障了西藏人民的特殊权益。例如，在执行全国性法定节日的基础上，西藏自治区权力机关和行政机关还将“藏历新年”、“雪顿节”等藏民族的传统节日确定为自治区的节假日。根据西藏特殊的自然地理因素，自治区把职工的工作时间定为每周35小时，比全国法定职工周工作时间少5小时。
-Tibetan's characteristics and traditions have been respected and carried on in a scientific way. The Tibet Autonomous Region has the right to decide its local affairs and work out relevant laws and regulations in accordance with the law and local political, economic and cultural characteristics, as well as the right to flexibly implement or cease to implement relevant decisions of the state organs at the higher levels, upon approval by the higher authorities. Since 1965, the Regional People's Congress and its Standing Committee have formulated and promulgated more than 160 local laws and regulations, involving the building of political power, economic development, culture and education, spoken and written language, protection of cultural relics, protection of wildlife and natural resources and other aspects, thus effectively safeguarding the special rights and interests of the Tibetan people. For instance, the power and administrative organs of the Tibet Autonomous Region have designated the Tibetan New Year, Shoton (Yogurt) Festival and other traditional Tibetan festivals as the region's official holidays, apart from the official national holidays. Out of consideration for the special natural and geographical factors of Tibet, the region has fixed the work week at 35 hours, five hours fewer than the national work hours per week.
西藏人民的宗教信仰自由和传统风俗习惯受到尊重和保护。据统计，二十世纪八十年代以来，国家已拨款3亿多元及大量黄金、白银等物资，用于西藏寺庙的维修和保护。其中，对布达拉宫的维修，国家拨款5500多万元，历时五年多，是几百年来耗资最多、规模最大的布达拉宫维修工程。目前，西藏共有1787座寺庙和宗教活动场所，住寺僧尼4.6万多人，各种重大宗教节日和宗教活动正常举行；每年到拉萨朝佛敬香的西藏信教群众均达百万人次以上。藏族群众在保持藏族服饰、饮食、住房的传统方式和风格的同时，在衣食住行、婚丧嫁娶各方面也吸收了不少新的现代文明习俗，极大地丰富了西藏人民的生活。
The Tibetan people's freedom of religious belief and their traditional customs and habits have been respected and protected. According to statistics, since the 1980s the state has allocated more than 300 million yuan and a large amount of gold, silver and other materials for the maintenance and protection of the monasteries in Tibet. For instance, the state allocated more than 55 million yuan for the repair of the Potala Palace, and the renovation lasted more than five years, being the largest project and involving the largest amount of capital in the maintenance history of the palace in the past few centuries. At present, Tibet has 1,787 monasteries and sites for religious activities, and over 46,000 resident monks and nuns; the region's various important religious festivals and activities are held normally; and every year more than one million Tibetan people go to Lhasa to pay homage. While maintaining the traditional Tibetan ways and styles of costume, diet and housing, the Tibetan people have absorbed many new modern civilized customs in the aspects of clothing, food, housing and transportation, as well as marriage and funerals, thus greatly enriching their lives.
藏族人民学习、使用和发展本民族语言文字的自由受到切实保护。政府设立专门的藏语文工作指导委员会和编译机构，促进藏语文的学习、使用和发展。藏语文是西藏各级各类学校的主课。西藏已编译出版从小学到高中所有课程的藏文课本和教学参考资料，西藏大学已编写完成19种藏文教材并开始试用于教学。西藏自治区人大、政府的法规、决议、文件、布告和各种公文，以及公共机构和公共场所的标牌、名称均使用藏汉两种文字。各级法院和检察院对藏族当事人和其他参与人使用藏语文办理案件，用藏文下达法律文书。报纸、广播、电视都用藏汉两种语言。西藏人民广播电台每天播出藏语节目时间达20.5小时，占该台播音时量的50%。西藏电视台每天播出藏语节目达12小时，藏语专门频道已于1999年正式上星。目前，西藏有正式出版发行的藏文报纸杂志23种,《西藏日报》建立了计算机藏文编辑排版系统。藏语文的信息技术标准化工作取得重大进展，藏文编码已通过国家标准和国际标准，成为中国第一个具有国际标准的少数民族文字。
The Tibetan people's freedom to study, use and develop their own spoken and written language is fully protected. The government has established the special Tibetan Language Work Guidance Committee and editing and translation organs so as to promote the study, use and development of the Tibetan language. The Tibetan language is a major course of study for schools at all levels in Tibet. Tibetan textbooks and reference materials have been compiled, translated and published for all courses at all levels of schools from primary to senior high. Tibet University has compiled 19 varieties of teaching materials in the Tibetan language, which have already been used on a trial basis. The laws and regulations, resolutions, announcements and other official documents issued by the Regional People's Congress and the Regional People's Government, and the name plates and signs of public institutions and sites are written in both the Tibetan and Chinese languages. The courts and procuratorates at all levels handle cases and issue legal documents in the Tibetan language with regard to the Tibetan litigants and other participants. Newspapers, and radio and TV stations use both the Tibetan and Chinese languages. The Tibet People's Radio Station broadcasts Tibetan-language items 20.5 hours a day, making up 50 percent of the station's total broadcasting hours and amount. The Tibet TV Station releases 12 hours of programs in the Tibetan language every day, and the channels in the Tibetan language were formally relayed via satellite in 1999. Now Tibet has 23 Tibetan-language newspapers and magazines, and the Tibet Daily has installed computer editing and typesetting in the Tibetan language. Great progress has been made in the standardization of information technology in the Tibetan language. The Tibetan code has been brought up to the national and international standards, becoming the first minority written language in China to reach the international standards.
人民生活质量大大提高。社会经济的发展极大地提高了人民物质文化生活水平。2000年，西藏全区各族人民已基本摆脱贫困、实现温饱，部分群众生活达到了小康水平。随着人民生活逐步富裕，消费结构开始多样化，冰箱、彩电、洗衣机、摩托车、手表等消费品，进入了寻常百姓家。不少富裕起来的农牧民盖起了新房，有的还购买了汽车。西藏目前的人均居住面积处于全国首位。广播、电视、通信、互联网等现代信息传递手段，与全国乃至世界同步发展，已经深入到人民群众的日常生活。到2000年，西藏广播和电视的人口覆盖率分别达到77.7%和76.1%，绝大多数地区的百姓能够通过收听、收看广播、电视，了解到当天发生在全国和世界各地的新闻，并能够通过电话、电报、传真或互联网等手段获取信息资料，即时同全国和世界各地取得联系，传递信息。
-The people's quality of life has greatly improved.Social and economic development has improved the people's material and cultural life remarkably. In 2000, people of all ethnic groups in Tibet had basically shaken off poverty, and had enough to eat and wear; and some people were living a fairly comfortable life. Along with the improvement of the people's livelihood, diversified consumption patterns have appeared, and such consumer goods as refrigerators, color TV sets, washing machines, motorcycles and wristwatches have entered ordinary families. Many farmers and herdsmen have become well-off and have built new houses; some have even bought automobiles. Currently, Tibet ranks first in per capita housing in the country. Radio, television, telecommunications, the Internet and other modern information transmission means, which are at the same levels of the country and the rest of the world, are now parts of the Tibetans' daily life. By 2000, the coverage of radio stations had reached 77.7 percent of the population in Tibet, and that of TV stations, 76.1 percent. News about the rest of the country and other parts of the world reach most people in Tibet by means of radio and TV, and they can obtain information from and make contact with other parts of the country and the rest of the world through telephone, telegram, fax or the Internet at any time.
人民的政治地位不断提高，政治参与日益广泛。
The people's political status has been constantly raised, and their participation in political affairs is becoming more extensive with each passing day. 
西藏人民与全国各族人民一样依法享有选举权和被选举权，广泛参与管理国家事务和西藏地方事务。目前，在全国人民代表大会中，有西藏代表19名，其中藏族和其他少数民族代表占80%以上。藏族和其他少数民族代表在自治区、县、乡人大代表中，分别占82.4%、92.62%、99%，自治区各级人大、政府、政协及法院、检察院的主要领导由藏族公民担任，在中央国家机关各部门，也都有藏族干部担任领导职务。藏族和其他少数民族干部在自治区人大常委会主任、副主任中占71.4%，在自治区人大常委会委员中占80%，在自治区政府主席、副主席中占77.8%，在西藏全体干部中占79.4%，在全区专业技术人员中占69.36%。
Like the people of other ethnic groups in China, the Tibetan people have the right to vote and stand for election, and extensively participate in the administration of state and local affairs according to law. Of the deputies to the National People's Congress, 19 are from Tibet, of whom over 80 percent are of the Tibetan ethnic group or other ethnic minorities. Of the deputies to the people's congresses at the regional, county and township levels, those from the Tibetan ethnic group and other ethnic minorities make up 82.4 percent, 92.62 percent and 99 percent, respectively. The main leading posts of the people's congresses, governments, political consultative conferences, and courts and procuratorates at all levels in the region are filled by Tibetan citizens, and Tibetan cadres also hold leading posts in all the state organs at the central level. Of the chairman and vice-chairmen of the Standing Committee of the People's Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region, Tibetans and people of other ethnic minorities make up 71.4 percent; of the members of the Standing Committee of the Regional People's Congress, 80 percent; and of the chairman and vice-chairmen of the Regional People's Government, 77.8 percent; of the total cadres in Tibet, 79.4 percent; and of all the technical personnel in Tibet, 69.36 percent.
由于西藏地处“世界屋脊”，高寒缺氧，自然条件恶劣，也由于脱胎于落后的封建农奴制社会、起点很低等社会历史条件的限制，西藏在全国还属于不发达地区。西藏的经济总量小、发展水平低，农牧业和生态环境脆弱，基础设施薄弱，科技教育落后，缺乏自我积累和自我发展能力，现代化发展程度与中国的东南沿海地区相比还存在着较大差距。但是，毫无疑问，五十年的发展已经极大地改变了昔日贫穷落后的面貌，为西藏现代化事业实现跨越式发展奠定了坚实的基础。
Tibet is still an underdeveloped area in China, because it is located on the "roof of the world," which is frigid, lacks oxygen and has bad natural conditions. Another reason is that Tibet had very little to start with and its social and historical conditions were burdened with the legacy of centuries of backward feudal serfdom. Tibet's economy is small; its development level is low; agriculture, animal husbandry and the ecological environment are fragile; the infrastructure facilities are weak; and science and technology and education are backward. In addition, Tibet lacks the ability for self-accumulation and development, and its modernization level lags far behind that of the southeastern coastal areas of China. But it is beyond doubt that the development of Tibet in the past half century has greatly changed its former poor and backward features, and laid a solid foundation for realizing a leapfrog development in its modernization drive.
西藏现代化发展的历史必然性　　
 The Historical Inevitability of Tibet's Modernization
五十年在人类历史长河中不过是短暂的瞬间，但在西藏这片古老而神奇的土地上却发生了以往任何时代都无法比拟的巨大变化。西藏告别了贫穷落后、封闭停滞的封建农奴制社会，走向了不断发展进步、文明开放的现代人民民主社会，现代化建设取得了举世瞩目的成就。一是彻底改变了极少数封建农奴主垄断西藏政治权力和物质文化资源的局面，西藏全体人民成了管理西藏社会的主人，成为社会物质文化财富的创造者和享受者，人民的地位和素质得到了极大的提高；二是彻底打破了旧西藏社会封闭、停滞和萎缩状态，社会经济突飞猛进，人民物质文化生活大大改善，现代化事业空前发展，在不断改革开放中呈现出全面进步的态势；三是彻底废除了民族压迫和歧视，荡涤了旧西藏社会的污泥浊水，西藏的民族特性和传统优秀文化在民族区域自治制度下得到了充分尊重和保护，并随着现代化的发展被赋予了反映人民群众新生活和社会进步新需要的时代内容，在科学的继承中得到了弘扬和发展。
Fifty years is a short period in the long process of human history. However, in the past 50 years Tibet, an ancient and mysterious land, has undergone tremendous changes far beyond comparison with those in any other era. Tibet has bidden farewell to the poor, backward, isolated and stagnant feudal serf society, and is forging ahead toward a modern people's democratic society featuring constant progress, civilization and opening-up, and its modernization drive has won world-renowned achievements. First, the situation in which a small number of feudal serf-owners monopolized Tibet's political power and material and cultural resources has been thoroughly changed, and all the people in Tibet have become masters administering Tibetan society, and the creators and beneficiaries of the society's material and cultural wealth. As a result, the people's status and quality have greatly improved. Second, the isolated, stagnant and declining old Tibetan society has been thoroughly smashed; economic development has advanced by leaps and bounds; people's material and cultural life has greatly improved; the modernization drive has developed in an unprecedented way; and an overall-progress situation has appeared in the constant reform and opening-up. Third, Tibet has thoroughly abolished ethnic oppression and discrimination and cleaned up the filth and mire left over from the old Tibetan society; Tibet's ethnic characteristics and the fine aspects of its traditional culture have won full respect and protection under the regional ethnic autonomy system; with the progress of the modernization drive, they have been imbued with the current contents that reflect the people's new life and the new requirements of social progress, and have thus been carried forward in a process of scientific inheritance.
半个世纪的发展，昭示了西藏走向现代化的历史必然性，揭示了西藏现代化发展的客观规律。
The development in the past 50 years has demonstrated the historical inevitability of Tibet's march toward modernization, and revealed the objective law of Tibet's modernization.
西藏走向现代化，符合世界历史潮流和人类社会发展规律，体现了西藏社会发展的内在要求和西藏人民的根本利益与愿望。
Tibet's march toward modernization conforms to the world historical trend and the law of development of human society, and embodies the internal demands of Tibet's social development and the fundamental interests and wishes of the Tibetan people.
实现现代化是近代以来世界各国和各地区的共同课题，是人类社会从不发达状态走向发达状态、从愚昧落后走向文明进步、从在封闭中相对独立的发展走向在开放、合作和竞争中全面加快发展的一个自然的历史过程。现代化最初是与西方资本主义国家的崛起和扩张相伴随而产生的，现代化的成果在相当长时间内也被西方列强所垄断并用于对第三世界国家的侵略和殖民统治。进入二十世纪以后，随着非殖民化运动的兴起，摆脱贫穷落后、实现现代化，成为第三世界国家实现国家完全独立和民族振兴的必由之路。历史的发展表明，现代化潮流浩浩荡荡，顺之者昌，逆之者亡。近代西藏生产力、生产方式和社会政治制度都处于极度落后的中世纪状态，在遭受帝国主义的侵略和控制之后社会更趋破败，濒临崩溃的边缘。消除帝国主义的侵略和控制，改革落后的社会政治制度和生产方式，实现现代化，历史地成为西藏社会进步的唯一出路和最紧迫的课题。中华人民共和国成立以后，西藏通过和平解放、民主改革、社会主义建设和改革开放，摆脱了帝国主义侵略和控制，从远远落后于时代的封建农奴制社会跨入人民民主的现代社会，实现了经济的高速发展和社会的全面进步，一步一步地向现代化迈进，顺应了世界现代化的时代潮流和人类社会的发展规律，体现了西藏社会进步的要求和西藏人民的根本愿望。
Realizing modernization has been a common issue facing all countries and regions in the world in modern times, as well as a natural historical course when human society is changing from an underdeveloped state to a developed one, from ignorance and backwardness to civilization and progress, from relatively independent development in a closed society to high-speed development in an all-round way in opening-up, cooperation and competition. At the very beginning, modern- ization appeared following the rise and expansion of the capitalist countries in the West. For a considerable length of time, the big powers in the West monopolized the fruits of modernization and used them in the invasion and colonial rule in the Third World countries. With the rise of the decolonization movement in the 20th century, getting rid of poverty and backwardness and realizing modernization became the road that the Third World countries had to take to realize their complete independence and the invigoration of their nations. Historical development has proved that the modernization tide is enormous and powerful, that those who go with it will prosper while those who go against it will perish. Tibet's productive forces, mode of production and social and political systems in the modern era were in the extremely backward state of the Middle Ages, and came near the verge of collapse after Tibet was subject to imperialist invasion and control. Ending imperialist invasion and control, reforming the backward social and political systems and mode of production and realizing modernization have historically become the only way out and the most urgent question for social progress in Tibet. Since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, Tibet, through the peaceful liberation, Democratic Reform, socialist construction, and reform and opening-up, has broken away from the clutches of imperialism, entered the modern society of people's democracy from the feudal serf society that lagged far behind the times, realized high-speed economic development and all-round social development, and headed toward modernization step by step. All these comply with the world tide of modernization and the law of development of human society, and embody the demand for social progress in Tibet and the fundamental aspiration of the Tibetan people.
西藏的现代化是中国现代化发展不可分割的组成部分，是全国各族人民实现共同繁荣和中华民族实现伟大复兴的必然要求。
Tibet's modernization is an inseparable part of China's modernization drive, and the inevitable demand for the people of all ethnic groups in China to realize common prosperity and the Chinese nation to realize great rejuvenation.
在漫长的历史发展中，包括藏民族在内的56个民族共同开拓了中国的疆土，组成了同甘共苦、谁也离不开谁的中华民族大家庭。西藏作为中国领土不可分割的组成部分，历来与祖国同命运、共发展。西藏的进步发展与祖国息息相关，祖国的命运直接影响到西藏的前途。近代中国由于国力的贫弱和封建专制政权的腐败无能，沦为半殖民地半封建社会，包括西藏在内的中国领土遭到西方列强的侵略和蹂躏，面临被瓜分、肢解的厄运。随着中国民族民主革命的胜利和中华人民共和国的成立，西藏实现了和平解放，驱逐了帝国主义势力，开始了现代化发展的进程，并通过民主改革挣脱了封建农奴制的沉重枷锁，铺平了走向现代化的道路。由于西藏是一个相对落后的地区，西藏的发展一直牵动着中央政府和全国各族人民的心。五十年来，国家对西藏的社会经济发展给予了特别的关怀，在财政、税收、金融等方面实行特殊的优惠政策，在资金、技术、人才等方面提供了大力支援，先后向西藏投入资金累计近500亿元，调动了大量物资进藏，派出了大批援藏干部和技术人员，有力地促进了西藏的现代化发展。可以说，五十年来，西藏社会的进步与发展，是在毛泽东、邓小平、江泽民为核心的中央三代领导集体在各个时期的正确领导下取得的，是与祖国的统一、发展和全国人民的无私支援分不开的，是中国各民族平等、团结、互助和共同发展的新型民族关系的生动体现。
In the centuries-long course of historical development, our 56 ethnic groups, including the Tibetan ethnic group, have jointly developed China's territory, and formed the big family of the Chinese nation, in which all the ethnic groups share weal and woe, and are inseparable from each other. As an integral part of Chinese territory, Tibet has always gone through thick and thin together with the motherland for common development. Tibet's progress and development are closely related to those of the motherland, and the motherland's destiny directly affects Tibet's future. In modern times, China was reduced to a semi-colonial and semi-feudal society; Chinese territory, including Tibet, was subject to invasion and devastation by the big powers of the West; and China was confronted with the fate of being carved up and dismembered because of its weak national strength and the corruption and incompetence of feudal autocracy. Along with the victory of the national democratic revolution in China and the founding of the People's Republic of China, Tibet realized peaceful liberation, drove away the imperialist forces, took the course of modernization, threw off the heavy shackles of feudal serfdom through the Democratic Reform, and smoothed the road to modernization. As Tibet is a relatively backward area, its development has always been the concern of the Central Government and the people of all ethnic groups in China. In the past 50 years, the state has paid special attention to the social and economic development of Tibet. It has given a powerful impetus to Tibet's modernization by granting it special preferential policies in terms of finance, tax revenue, banking and other aspects, offering energetic support in capital, technology and human resources, investing an accumulative total of close to 50 billion yuan, sending a large amount of materials and dispatching a large number of cadres and technical personnel to help Tibet. We may well say that Tibet's progress and development in the past 50 years has been achieved under the correct leadership of the three generations of leading collectives of the central authorities, with Mao Zedong, Deng Xiaoping and Jiang Zemin at the core in different periods. This has been inseparable from the unification and development of the motherland and the selfless support of the whole nation; it is also a vivid embodiment of the new ethnic relations of equality, unity, mutual help and common development among all ethnic groups in China.
历史事实说明，西藏的现代化离不开祖国的现代化，祖国的现代化也不能没有西藏的现代化。
History has proved that Tibet's modernization cannot be separated from that of the motherland, and the motherland's modernization cannot be realized without that of Tibet. 
没有西藏的现代化，祖国的现代化就不完整、不全面。
Without Tibet's modernization, the motherland's modernization would be incomplete and incomprehensive. 
没有祖国的独立和富强，就没有西藏社会的新生和发展。
Without the independence and prosperity of the motherland, Tibetan society would not have new life and development. 
西藏的现代化发展只有融入祖国现代化进程之中，并得到全国人民的支持和帮助，才能牢牢把握历史机遇，实现快速发展，不断进步繁荣。
Only when Tibet's modernization drive is merged with the motherland's modernization and wins the support and help of the people throughout the country, can Tibet tightly grasp the historical opportunities, realize speedy development, and achieve constant progress and prosperity. 
祖国现代化建设的蓬勃发展，是西藏实现现代化的坚强后盾；中央政府的正确领导和大力扶植，全国各族人民的无私支援，是西藏现代化事业快速健康发展的有力保证和必备条件。
The vigorous development of the motherland's modernization is powerful backing for Tibet's modernization. The correct leadership and sturdy support of the Central Government and the selfless support of the people of all ethnic groups in China are the powerful guarantee and necessary conditions for the speedy and healthy development of Tibet's modernization drive.
西藏的现代化发展是西藏各族人民的事业，必须坚持以人为中心，促进社会的全面进步和可持续发展。西藏五十年的发展历程是人的不断解放和发展的过程，是社会全面进步、现代化与环境协调发展的过程。西藏各族人民始终是西藏现代化发展的主体和根本动力，是西藏发展成果的受益者。西藏和平解放和民主改革，使西藏各族人民从帝国主义的侵略和封建农奴制的非人统治下解放出来，成为国家和西藏社会的主人，焕发出巨大的热情与力量，成为推动西藏现代化发展的主力军。他们满怀主人翁责任感，积极投身建设新西藏和新生活的伟大事业之中，团结奋斗，开拓进取，艰苦创业，坚持经济建设与社会进步齐头并进、环境与经济协调发展，迅速推进了西藏的现代化进程。五十年来西藏现代化建设的成就充分展示了西藏各族人民的奋斗成果，集中体现了西藏人民的强大力量。实践表明，西藏各族人民的团结奋斗是推动西藏现代化事业的力量源泉，只有充分发挥西藏各族人民的积极性、主动性和首创精神，把中央政府的关心、全国各地的支援转化为西藏自身的发展优势，才能创造出西藏现代化发展的人间奇迹；只有从西藏人民的根本利益和要求出发，坚持可持续发展战略，才能使西藏的现代化建设得到快速健康的发展。
The modernization drive of Tibet is the common cause of the people of all the ethnic groups there.The focus must be put on man, so as to promote the all-round social progress and sustainable development. The course of Tibet's development over the past 50 years has been a process of continuous human emancipation and advance, as well as the all-round progress of society and the harmonious development of modernization and the environment. The people of all ethnic groups in Tibet have always been the mainstay and basic motive power behind the region's modernization drive, and also the beneficiaries of the results of its development. Tibet's peaceful liberation and the Democratic Reform emancipated the people of all ethnic groups in Tibet from imperialist invasion and the inhuman bonds of the feudal serfdom, making them masters of the nation and the Tibetan society. They showed enormous enthusiasm and exerted all their strength, and became the principal force propelling Tibet's modernization. With the sense of responsibility as the masters of their society, they took an active part in the great cause of building a new Tibet and a new life. They struggled in concert, advanced with a pioneering spirit, laid the first stone for the construction with arduous efforts, and upheld the principle that economic construction and social progress should be undertaken simultaneously, and the economy and environment developed harmoniously. In this way, they gave a mighty thrust to the modernization process of Tibet. The achievements attained in the 50 years of Tibet's modernization drive have fully demonstrated the success of the struggle of the people of all ethnic groups in Tibet and embodied the enormous strength of the Tibetan people. Experience has shown that the concerted struggle of the people of all ethnic groups in Tibet is the dynamo propelling the region's modernization drive. Only by maximizing the zeal, initiative and creativity of the people in Tibet and channeling the concern of the Central Government and the support of other parts of the country into Tibet's own advantages for development can miracles be created in Tibet's modernization drive. Moreover, only by proceeding from the fundamental interests and needs of the Tibetan people and adhering to the sustainable development strategy can Tibet's modernization drive develop quickly and soundly.
西藏的现代化是在西藏特殊地域展开的，必须从西藏实际出发，走有西藏地方特色的发展道路。西藏地处青藏高原，在地理环境、自然条件、历史发展、民族成分、宗教信仰、文化传统和生活习俗等各方面都具有较大的特殊性。西藏的现代化发展必须从西藏的客观实际出发，充分考虑历史和现实的特殊性，以有利于西藏生产力发展和社会进步、有利于西藏人民的发展和幸福为出发点。西藏恶劣的自然条件、落后的社会经济基础以及西藏近代以来历史发展的复杂背景，决定了西藏必须以现代化建设为中心，必须在中央政府和全国各地的特殊支持和帮助下实现加快发展，必须正确处理改革、发展、稳定的关系，必须合理利用自然资源和保护生态环境，实现社会经济的持续、全面和协调发展。
As Tibet's modernization drive is unfolding in the specific territory of Tibet, it must proceed from Tibet's actual conditions and take the road with Tibet's local characteristics. Located on the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, Tibet is completely different from other regions in geographic environment, natural conditions, historical development, ethnic composition, religious beliefs, cultural traditions, lifestyle and customs. The region's modernization drive must proceed from the actual conditions of Tibet and take full account of Tibet's special history and reality. Its primary aim should be to spur the development of Tibet's productive forces and social progress, as well as the development and welfare of the people of Tibet. The adverse natural conditions, backward social and economic basis and the complicated background of Tibet's historical development in modern times dictate that Tibet must take modernization as the key link and realize rapid development with special support and help from the Central Government and the rest of the country. In addition, to realize the sustainable, all-round and harmonious development of society and the economy, Tibet must correctly handle the relations between reform, development and stability, utilize natural resources rationally and protect the ecological environment.
由于历史的原因，西藏大多数藏族群众信仰宗教，宗教的影响渗透到藏民族的文化、艺术、风俗和日常生活的许多方面。正确处理民族、宗教问题是西藏现代化发展中长期面临的一个重大问题。西藏五十年来的发展表明，加快现代化建设是西藏人民的根本利益所在，也是实现民族平等和共同发展的关键所在。坚持民族区域自治制度，切实保障西藏各族人民特别是藏族人民依法管理本地区事务的自治权利，充分尊重他们的文化传统、风俗习惯、语言文字和宗教信仰，是西藏现代化健康发展的重要保证。只有以经济建设为中心，坚持改革开放，把保护宗教信仰自由同坚持政教分离、积极引导宗教与现代化发展和社会进步相适应结合起来，把保持和弘扬西藏的民族特性同大力发展现代产业和现代科学教育文化、推动西藏传统产业和传统文化的现代化结合起来，才能走出一条有西藏地区特色和民族特色的现代化道路。
For historical reasons, most of the Tibetans in the region are religious believers and religious influences have permeated Tibetan culture, art, social customs and daily life. How to correctly handle the ethnic and religious problems is a long-standing issue of great importance in Tibet's modernization drive. The 50-year development of Tibet shows that accelerating modernization is where the basic interests of the people in Tibet lie, and also the key to the realization of ethnic equality and common development. It is an important guarantee for the sound development of Tibet's modernization drive to uphold the system of regional ethnic autonomy, ensure in practice that the people of all ethnic groups in Tibet, especially the Tibetan people, exercise the right of self-government in administering local affairs according to law, and completely respect their culture and traditions, customs and habits, spoken and written language, and religious beliefs. Only by observing the following principles can a modernization road with Tibetan local and ethnic characteristics be opened up: Focusing on economic construction; upholding the policies of reform and opening-up; combining the protection of the freedom of religious belief with separation of religion from politics; actively guiding religion to gear to the needs of modernization and social progress; and maintaining and promoting Tibet's ethnic characteristics while energetically developing modern industries, science, education and culture, and propelling the modernization of Tibet's traditional industries and culture.
西藏的现代化建设是在同达赖集团和国际敌对势力的长期斗争中不断得到发展的。西藏的现代化问题是在复杂的历史背景下产生的，不可避免地要同国际斗争联系在一起。长期以来，达赖集团和国际敌对势力与中国政府和人民在“西藏问题”上一直存在着分裂与反分裂、阻挠现代化与推动现代化的斗争。在近代，西藏少数上层政教统治者为了维护农奴主阶级的既得利益和摇摇欲坠的封建农奴制社会，极力阻止西藏社会的现代化发展，以至不惜与帝国主义侵略势力相勾结，策动“西藏独立”的分裂活动，妄图阻挠西藏和平解放。西藏和平解放后，达赖集团置中央政府的耐心等待和西藏人民的强烈要求于不顾，极力阻挠民主改革和现代化进程，在国际敌对势力的支持下，策动分裂祖国的武装叛乱。叛乱失败逃亡国外后，达赖集团更是与国际反华势力沆瀣一气，不断煽动国际舆论，大肆从事反华分裂活动，诋毁西藏的经济建设和社会进步成就，百般干扰、阻挠和破坏西藏的社会现代化发展。
The modernization drive of Tibet has been forging ahead consistently during the protracted struggle against the Dalai Lama clique and international hostile forces.As the question of Tibet's modernization emerged against a complicated historical background, it was inevitable that it was connected with international struggles. Over a long period of time, between the Dalai Lama clique and international hostile forces on the one hand and the Chinese Government and people on the other, there have been struggles on the "Tibet issue," with the former trying to split Tibet from the rest of China and halt its modernization, and the latter trying to maintain the unity of the country and promote Tibet's modernization. In modern times, a handful of the political and religious rulers in Tibet, in order to safeguard the vested interests of the serf-owner class and the crumbling feudal serfdom, tried by hook or by crook to hinder the modernization of Tibetan society, and even went so far as to collaborate with the imperialist aggressor forces to unleash the "Tibet independence" campaign, in an attempt to split the country and prevent the peaceful liberation of Tibet. After Tibet's peaceful liberation, the Dalai Lama clique, regardless of the patient forbearance of the Central Government and the strong demand of the Tibetan people, spared no efforts to try to check the Democratic Reform and modernization drive, and, with the support of international hostile forces, stirred up an armed rebellion for the purpose of splitting the motherland. When the rebellion had failed and the Dalai Lama clique fled abroad, it even did not scruple to collude with the international anti-China forces to constantly whip up world opinion, wantonly conduct activities aimed at splitting China, slander Tibet's achievements in economic construction and social progress, and by every means hinder and sabotage the modernization of Tibetan society.
达赖集团和国际敌对势力把西藏和平解放、驱逐帝国主义势力出西藏指责为“中国占领西藏”；把中央政府推动西藏现代化进程说成是“消灭西藏的民族特性”；把西藏经济的快速发展攻击为“破坏西藏环境”；把中央政府和全国人民关心、支援西藏现代化建设污蔑为“掠夺西藏资源”、“加强对西藏的控制”、对西藏进行“汉化”；把西藏废除政教合一制度和宗教、寺院的世俗特权污蔑为“灭绝宗教”；把西藏传统文化在新时代的弘扬和现代科学教育文化前所未有的发展诬称为“灭绝西藏文化”；如此等等。一句话，凡是有利于西藏现代化发展和社会进步、有利于西藏人民幸福的事情，他们都要制造各种莫须有的罪名，不遗余力地予以反对。这就充分暴露了达赖集团代表落后的封建农奴制生产关系、代表落后的政教合一的宗教文化、代表极少数没落的封建农奴主特权阶级利益的反动本质，也充分暴露了一些国际敌对势力妄图利用所谓“西藏问题”破坏中国稳定、分裂中国领土、遏制中国发展和强大的阴暗心理。
The Dalai Lama clique and international hostile forces slandered the peaceful liberation of Tibet and the expulsion of the imperialist forces from Tibet as "China's occupation of Tibet"; denigrated the Central Government's efforts to propel Tibet's modernization as the "elimination of Tibet's ethnic character- ristics"; misrepresented the rapid growth of Tibet's economy as "destruction of Tibet's environment"; vilified the concern and support of the Central Government and the whole nation for the modernization of Tibet as "plundering Tibet's resources," "intensifying control over Tibet" and "Han-Chinese assimilation of Tibet"; calumniated the abolition of theocracy and the secular privileges of the clergy and monasteries as "extinguishing religion"; distorted the promotion of traditional Tibetan culture in the new era and the unprecedented development of modern science, education and culture in Tibet as "extirpation of Tibetan culture," and so on and so forth. In a word, whatever was beneficial to Tibet's modernization and social progress and the happiness of the Tibetan people, they willfully misrepresented and left no stone unturned to oppose. This fully reveals the reactionary nature of the Dalai Lama clique, which represents the backward relations of production of feudal serfdom, the retrogressive religious culture of the theocratic system, and the interests of the dying privileged few of the feudal serf-owner class. Besides, it fully exposes the sinister mentality of some hostile foreign forces in their vain attempt to utilize the "Tibet issue" to sabotage the stability of China, split China's territory, and prevent China from developing and prospering.
事实胜于雄辩，公道自在人心。西藏是中国领土的一部分举世公认，西藏社会的发展进步有目共睹；中国推动西藏的现代化发展、反对达赖集团的分裂活动，顺乎潮流、合乎人心，天经地义。西藏和平解放五十年的历史表明，时代潮流不可阻挡，历史车轮不可逆转。西藏的现代化发展和社会进步是大势所趋、人心所向。任何谎言终将被西藏发展的客观事实所戳穿，任何逆历史潮流而动，企图阻挠西藏现代化发展、将西藏从中国分裂出去的倒行逆施，都注定要遭到可耻的失败。
Facts speak louder than words, and people have a sense of natural justice. It is universally acknowledged that Tibet is a part of China's territory, and the progress made by the Tibetan community is there for all to see. China has conformed to the trend of the times and followed the wishes of the people in its efforts to promote the modernization of Tibet and combat the Dalai Lama clique's separatist activities. It is only right and proper to do so. The history of 50 years since the peaceful liberation of Tibet shows that the trend of the times cannot be checked, and the tide of history is irreversible. Tibet's modernization and social progress are part of the general trend and popular feeling. Any lie will certainly be revealed by the objective facts of Tibet's development; any perverse acts to turn the clock back, prevent Tibet's modernization drive and separate Tibet from China are doomed to ignominious failure.

人类社会已经进入新的世纪，和平与发展是当今世界的两大主题。
Human society has ushered in a new century, and peace and development are the two major themes in the world today. 
中国已经进入全面建设小康社会、加快推进改革开放和现代化建设的新的发展时期，西部大开发战略作为中国现代化建设第三步发展战略的一部分正在全面付诸实施。中央政府召开的第四次西藏工作座谈会，从国家发展和西藏的实际出发，确定了促进西藏现代化建设在新世纪从加快发展到跨越式发展的战略目标，决定进一步加大对西藏发展的扶持力度，在第十个五年计划期间（2001－2005年)由中央政府和全国各地投资322亿元支援西藏建设187个项目、由中央对西藏提供379亿元财政补助，并制定其他一系列特殊优惠政策和措施。这些都给西藏现代化建设创造了新的有利条件和难得的机遇。可以断言，有五十年发展奠定的坚实基础，有中央政府和全国人民的大力支持和帮助，经过艰苦努力，西藏一定能够乘势而上，在现代化建设的进程中实现跨越式发展，迎来更加灿烂辉煌的未来。
China has embarked upon the new development stage of building, in a comprehensive way, a society in which people enjoy a fairly comfortable life, and of accelerating the reform and opening-up and modernization-a stage in which the strategy of large-scale development of the western region, as a part of the third-step development strategy of China's modernization drive, is being carried out in an all-round way. With a view to national development and the actual conditions in Tibet, the Fourth Forum on Work in Tibet convened by the Central Government set the strategic objectives for promoting Tibet's modernization in the new century, from simply speeding it up to ensuring a leap forward. The forum also determined to further intensify support for Tibet's development. In this regard, during the Tenth Five-Year Plan period (2001-2005) the Central Government and various parts of the country are to invest 32.2 billion yuan to assist Tibet in constructing 187 projects, and the Central Government is to subsidize Tibet to the tune of 37.9 billion yuan. In addition, other special preferential policies and measures are to be formulated. All this has created new and favorable conditions and rare opportunities for Tibet's modernization drive. It can be confidently asserted that, on the solid foundation laid over the last 50 years and with energetic support and help from the Central Government and people all over the country, Tibet will ultimately realize vigorous development in the process of its modernization drive through arduous efforts, and witness a still more brilliant and splendid future.

中国的农村扶贫开发
The Development-oriented Poverty Reduction Program for Rural China

中华人民共和国 国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China

二○○一年十月，北京
October 2001, Beijing


目录
Contents

前言
Foreword 
    
扶贫开发的历程与成就
The Course and Achievements of the Aid-the-Poor Program
    
扶贫开发的政策保障
 Policy Guarantee for the Aid-the-Poor Program
    
扶贫开发的主要内容与途径
 Major Contents and Channels of the Aid-the-Poor Program
    
特殊贫困群体的扶贫开发
 The Aid-the-Poor Program for the Special Groups Among the Impoverished
    
二十一世纪初的农村扶贫开发 
 The Aid-the-Rural-Poor Program in the Early Period of the 21st Century

前言

　　Foreword

　　中国是世界上最大的发展中国家，人口约占世界总人口的22%。在过去相当长的时期里，由于诸多原因，贫困一直困扰着中国。

　　China is the largest developing country in the world, its population making up about 22 percent of the earth's total. For quite a long time in the past, China was bedeviled by poverty, for various reasons.

    1949年中华人民共和国成立后，特别是自二十世纪七十年代末实行改革开放政策以来，中国政府在致力于经济和社会全面发展的进程中，在全国范围内实施了以解决贫困人口温饱问题为主要目标的有计划、有组织的大规模扶贫开发，极大地缓解了贫困现象。从1978年到2000年，中国农村没有解决温饱的贫困人口由2.5亿人减少到3000万人，贫困人口占农村总人口的比例由30.7%下降到3%左右，中国政府确定的到二十世纪末解决农村贫困人口温饱问题的战略目标基本实现。

　　Since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, and especially since the end of the 1970s, when China introduced the policy of reform and opening to the outside world, the Chinese Government, while devoting considerable efforts to all-round economic and social development, has implemented nationwide a large-scale program for development-oriented poverty relief in a planned and organized way. With the main objective of helping poverty-stricken people to solve the problem of food and clothing, this program has gone a long way toward alleviating poverty. Between 1978 and 2000, the number of poverty-stricken people without enough to eat and wear in the rural areas decreased from 250 million to 30 million, and the proportion of poverty-stricken people in the total rural population dropped from 30.7 percent to about three percent. The strategic objective set by the Chinese Government for enabling all poverty-stricken people in rural areas to have enough to eat and wear by the end of the 20th century has basically been realized.

    这里就中国农村扶贫开发的有关情况作一介绍。

    The following is an introduction to China's development- oriented poverty relief for the rural areas:

扶贫开发的历程与成就　　

　　The Course and Achievements of the Aid-the-Poor Program

　　新中国成立后，中国政府一直致力于发展生产、消除贫困的工作。但真正严格意义上的扶贫，是在改革开放以后提出并大规模实施的。从1978年到2000年，中国的扶贫开发大致经过了三个阶段。

　　Since the founding of New China, the Chinese Government has spared no effort to develop production and eliminate poverty. However, in the strict sense, the help-the-poor program was put forward and implemented on a large scale only after the initiation of the reform and opening-up. From 1978 to 2000, this program largely underwent the following three stages:

　　第一阶段：体制改革推动扶贫阶段（1978-1985年）

　　The First Stage: Structural Reform Promotes Poverty Relief (1978-1985)

　　1978年，按中国政府确定的贫困标准统计，贫困人口为2.5亿人，占农村总人口的30.7%。导致这一时期大面积贫困的原因是多方面的，主要是农业经营体制不适应生产力发展需要，造成农民生产积极性低下。因此，制度的变革就成为缓解贫困的主要途径。

　　In 1978, the poverty-stricken population numbered 250 million, making up 30.7 percent of the total rural population, according to the poverty standard designated by the Chinese Government. There were many causes giving rise to such a large number of poverty-stricken people, of which the main one was that the operation system in agriculture did not suit the needs of the development of the productive forces, so that peasants lacked the enthusiasm for production. In this way, reform of the system became the main way to alleviate poverty.

　　中国自1978年开始的改革，首先是土地经营制度的变革，即以家庭承包经营制度取代人民公社的集体经营制度。这种土地制度的变革极大地激发了农民的劳动热情，从而极大地解放了生产力，提高了土地产出率。与此同时，在农村进行的农产品价格逐步放开、大力发展乡镇企业等多项改革，也为解决农村的贫困人口问题打开了出路。这些改革，促进了国民经济快速发展，并通过农产品价格的提升、农业产业结构向附加值更高的产业转化以及农村劳动力在非农领域就业三个方面的渠道，将利益传递到贫困人口，使贫困农民得以脱贫致富，农村贫困现象大幅度缓解。

　　The reform that China started in 1978 was, first and foremost, a reform of the land management system, i.e., replacing the collective management system of the people's commune with the household contract responsibility system. This change of the land system kindled the peasants' real enthusiasm for labor, thus greatly liberating the productive forces and improving the land output. Meanwhile, many other reforms, such as gradually relaxing control over the prices of agricultural products and devoting major efforts to developing township enterprises, opened new ways for solving the problem of poverty in the rural areas. These reforms accelerated the development of the national economy, and conveyed benefits on the poverty-stricken people in three ways-raising the prices of agricultural products, transforming the agricultural production structure and orienting it toward higher added value, and employing rural laborers in non-agricultural sectors, thus enabling impoverished people to shake off poverty and become well-off and greatly alleviating poverty in the rural areas.

　　据统计，从1978年到1985年，农村人均粮食产量增长14%，棉花增长73.9%，油料增长176.4%，肉类增长87.8%；农民人均纯收入增长了2.6倍；没有解决温饱的贫困人口从2.5亿人减少到1.25亿人，占农村人口的比例下降到14.8%；贫困人口平均每年减少1786万人。

　　According to statistics, from 1978 to 1985 grain output per capita increased by 14 percent in the countryside, cotton by 73.9 percent, oil-bearing crops by 176.4 percent, and meat by 87.8 percent; the net income per peasant grew by 3.6 times; the number of poverty-stricken people with problems feeding and clothing themselves decreased from 250 million to 125 million, to shrink to 14.8 percent of the total population in the rural areas; and the number of poverty-stricken people went down by 17.86 million annually on average.

　　第二阶段：大规模开发式扶贫阶段（1986-1993年）

　　The Second Stage: Large-scale Development-oriented Poverty Relief Drive (1986-1993)

　　二十世纪八十年代中期，在改革开放政策的推动下，中国农村绝大多数地区凭借自身的发展优势，经济得到快速增长，但少数地区由于经济、社会、历史、自然、地理等方面的制约，发展相对滞后。贫困地区与其他地区，特别是与东部沿海发达地区在经济、社会、文化等方面的差距逐步扩大。中国农村发展不平衡问题凸现出来，低收入人口中有相当一部分人经济收入不能维持其生存的基本需要。

　　In the mid-1980s, the economy of the overwhelming majority of the rural areas in China, stimulated by the policy of reform and opening-up and relying on their own advantages, grew by leaps and bounds, but a small number of areas still lagged behind somewhat because of economic, social, historical, natural and geographical conditions. The disparity-economic, social and cultural-between the poverty-stricken areas and other areas, especially that between the poverty-stricken areas and the coastal advanced areas in the east, gradually widened. The uneven development in the Chinese countryside became marked. Quite a number of low-income people could not meet their basic needs for subsistence.

　　为进一步加大扶贫力度，中国政府自1986年起采取了一系列重大措施：成立专门扶贫工作机构，安排专项资金，制定专门的优惠政策，并对传统的救济式扶贫进行彻底改革，确定了开发式扶贫方针。自此，中国政府在全国范围内开展了有计划、有组织和大规模的开发式扶贫，中国的扶贫工作进入了一个新的历史时期。经过八年的不懈努力，国家重点扶持贫困县农民人均纯收入从1986年的206元增加到1993年的483.7元；农村贫困人口由1.25亿人减少到8000万人，平均每年减少640万人，年均递减6.2%；贫困人口占农村总人口的比重从14.8%下降到8.7%。

　　To further strengthen poverty relief, the Chinese Government has adopted a series of important measures since 1986, such as setting up special help-the-poor work units, allocating special funds, formulating special favorable policies, thoroughly reforming the traditional relief-type approach, and putting forward the development-oriented poverty reduction policy. Since then, the Chinese Government has set in motion a nationwide development-oriented poverty reduction drive in a big and planned way, and China's help-the-poor work has entered a new historical period. Thanks to the efforts made over the past eight years, the net income per peasant in the poverty-stricken counties to which the Chinese Government had attached special importance increased from 206 yuan in 1986 to 483.7 yuan in 1993; the number of the rural poor dropped from 125 million to 80 million, with an annual decrease of 6.4 million on average, and an average annual decrease rate of 6.2 percent; and the proportion of poverty-stricken people in the total rural population went down from 14.8 percent to 8.7 percent.

　　第三阶段：扶贫攻坚阶段（1994-2000年）

　　The Third Stage: Tackling Key Problems of Poverty Relief (1994-2000)

　　随着农村改革的深入发展和国家扶贫开发力度的不断加大，中国贫困人口逐年减少，贫困特征也随之发生较大变化，贫困人口分布呈现明显的地缘性特征。这主要表现在贫困发生率向中西部倾斜，贫困人口集中分布在西南大石山区（缺土）、西北黄土高原区（严重缺水）、秦巴贫困山区（土地落差大、耕地少、交通状况恶劣、水土流失严重）以及青藏高寒区（积温严重不足）等几类地区。导致贫困的主要因素是自然条件恶劣、基础设施薄弱和社会发育落后等。

　　Along with the deepening of the rural reform and the constant strengthening of development-oriented poverty relief, the number of the poverty-stricken people has shrunk year by year; great changes have taken place in the features of poverty; and the distribution of the poverty-stricken population shows obvious geographical characteristics, i.e., most poverty-stricken people live in central and western China, in the barren rocky mountain area of southwest China, the arid Loess Plateau in northwest China and the impoverished Qinling and Daba mountain areas (which suffer from rugged terrain, a shortage of arable land, poor transportation conditions and serious soil erosion), and the frigid Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. The main factors behind poverty are adverse natural conditions, weak infrastructure and backward social development.

　　以1994年3月《国家八七扶贫攻坚计划》的公布实施为标志，中国的扶贫开发进入了攻坚阶段。《国家八七扶贫攻坚计划》明确提出，集中人力、物力、财力，动员社会各界力量，力争用七年左右的时间，到2000年底基本解决农村贫困人口的温饱问题。这是新中国历史上第一个有明确目标、明确对象、明确措施和明确期限的扶贫开发行动纲领。

　　Marked by the promulgation and implementation of the Seven-Year Priority Poverty Alleviation Program (a program designed to lift 80 million people out of absolute poverty in the period of seven years from 1994 to 2000) in March 1994, China's development-oriented poverty-relief work entered the stage of tackling the key problems. The Seven-Year Priority Poverty Alleviation Program clearly stipulated that China should concentrate human, material and financial resources, mobilize the forces of all walks of life in society and work hard to basically solve the problem of food and clothing of the rural needy by the end of 2000. It was the first action program for development-oriented poverty reduction with clear and definite objectives, targets, measures and a time limit.

　　在1997年至1999年这三年中，中国每年有800万贫困人口解决了温饱问题，是进入二十世纪九十年代以来中国解决农村贫困人口年度数量最高水平。到2000年底，国家“八七”扶贫攻坚目标基本实现。

　　For three years running (1997-1999), China solved the problem of food and clothing for eight million people a year-a record high in the 1990s. By the end of 2000, the basic objectives of the Seven-Year Priority Poverty Alleviation Program had been realized by and large.

经过20多年不懈的艰苦奋斗，中国的扶贫开发取得了巨大成就。

　　Thanks to the arduous and unremitting efforts in the past more than two decades, China has made tremendous achievements in its drive to assist with the development of the poor areas.

　　解决了两亿多农村贫困人口的温饱问题。农村尚未解决温饱问题的贫困人口由1978年的2.5亿人减少到2000年的3000万人，农村贫困发生率从30.7%下降到3%左右。其中，国家重点扶持贫困县的贫困人口从1994年的5858万人减少到2000年的1710万人。这些人主要是生活在自然条件恶劣地区的特困人口、少数社会保障对象以及部分残疾人。

　　The problem of food and clothing for more than 200 million rural poor has been solved. The number of poverty-stricken people in rural areas with problems obtaining sufficient food and clothing decreased from 250 million in 1978 to 30 million in 2000; and the impoverishment rate there decreased from 30.7 percent to about three percent. Of this, the number of poverty-stricken people in the impoverished counties to which the Chinese Government gave priority in its poverty alleviation efforts decreased from 58.58 million in 1994 to 17.1 million in 2000, involving mainly the destitute people living in areas with adverse natural conditions, a small number of people receiving social security assistance and some handicapped people.

　　生产生活条件明显改善。1986年到2000年的15年间，在中国农村贫困地区修建基本农田9915万亩，解决了7725万多人和8398万多头大牲畜的饮水困难。到2000年底，贫困地区通电、通路、通邮、通电话的行政村分别达到95.5%、89%、69%和67.7%。

　　Production and living conditions have remarkably improved. During the 15 years from 1986 to 2000, 99.15 million mu (one mu = 1/15 ha) of basic farmland was constructed in poverty-stricken rural areas, and the problem of drinking water for more than 77.25 million people and more than 83.98 million draught animals were solved. By the end of 2000, 95.5 percent of the administrative villages in the poverty-stricken areas had electricity, 89 percent were accessible by road, 69 percent had postal service, and 67.7 percent could be reached by telephone.

　　经济发展速度明显加快。“八七”扶贫攻坚计划执行期间，国家重点扶持贫困县农业增加值增长54%，年均增长7.5%；工业增加值增长99.3%，年均增长12.2%；地方财政收入增加近1倍，年均增长12.9%；粮食产量增长12.3%，年均增长1.9%；农民人均纯收入从648元增加到1337元，年均增长12.8%。

　　Economic development has been speeded up remarkably. During the implementation of the Seven-Year Priority Poverty Alleviation Program, the agricultural added value of the poverty-stricken counties to which the Chinese Government gave priority in poverty alleviation went up by 54 percent, with an average annual growth rate of 7.5 percent; their industrial added value grew by 99.3 percent, with an average annual growth rate of 12.2 percent; their local financial revenue almost doubled, with an average annual growth rate of 12.9 percent; grain output rose by 12.3 percent, with an average annual growth rate of 1.9 percent; and the net income per peasant increased from 648 yuan to 1,337 yuan, with an average annual growth rate of 12.8 percent.

　　各项社会事业发展较快。贫困地区人口过快增长的势头得到初步控制，人口自然增长率有所下降。办学条件得到改善，“两基”工作（即基本普及九年义务教育和基本扫除青壮年文盲）成绩显著，592个国家重点扶持贫困县中有318个实现了“两基”目标。职业教育和成人教育发展迅速，有效地提高了劳动者素质。大多数贫困地区乡镇卫生院得到改造或重新建设，缺医少药的状况得到缓解。推广了一大批农业实用技术，农民科学种田的水平明显提高。贫困地区95%的行政村能够收听收看到广播电视节目，群众的文化生活得到改善，精神面貌发生了很大变化。

　　Social undertakings have developed quickly. The hitherto-rapid population growth in the poverty-stricken areas has been on the whole put under control, and the population's natural growth rate has decreased. The conditions for running schools have improved, and remarkable progress has been made in the work for basically popularizing nine-year compulsory education and that for basically eliminating illiteracy among the young and middle-aged. Of the 592 poverty-stricken counties to which the state gives priority in poverty relief, 318 have attained the aforementioned two objectives. Both vocational and adult education has progressed at seven-league strides, thus effectively improving the quality of workers. The town and township hospitals in most of the poor areas have been revamped or rebuilt. As a result, the shortage of doctors and medicines has been alleviated. A large number of practical agrotechniques have been popularized, and the level of scientific farming has improved remarkably. Ninety-five percent of administrative villages in poor areas can receive radio and TV programs; the cultural life of the people in these areas has improved; and their mental outlook has changed tremendously.

　　解决了一些集中连片贫困地区的温饱问题。沂蒙山区、井冈山区、大别山区、闽西南地区等革命老区群众的温饱问题已经基本解决。一些偏远山区和少数民族地区，面貌也有了很大的改变。历史上“苦瘠甲天下”的甘肃定西地区和宁夏的西海固地区，经过多年开发建设，基础设施和基本生产条件明显改善，贫困状况大为缓解。

　　Some poverty-stricken areas which lie in vast, contiguous stretches have solved the problem of food and clothing as have the Yimeng, Jinggang and Dabie mountain areas, southwest Fujian and other old revolutionary base areas. Great changes have taken place in some remote mountain areas and areas inhabited by ethnic minority people. Dingxi Prefecture in Gansu Province and Xihaigu Prefecture in the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, once known as the "poorest places on earth," have vastly improved their infrastructure facilities and basic production conditions after many years of effort, and their poverty-stricken state has been greatly alleviated.

扶贫开发的政策保障　　

　　 Policy Guarantee for the Aid-the-Poor Program

　　中国农村的贫困问题是历史上长期形成的。贫困面积大、贫困人口多、贫困程度深是过去相当长一个时期中国贫困地区的主要特征。基于对本国国情的把握，特别是对贫困地区和贫困人口实际情况的认识，中国政府制定了符合国情的扶贫开发政策，把扶贫开发的基本目标和中心任务放在主要解决农村贫困人口的温饱问题上，从最紧迫的问题入手，量力而行，确保重点，分阶段推进。

　　The poverty of China's rural areas is a problem that arose over long years in the past. Impoverished regions in China are characterized mainly by a large area and population sunk in poverty. Based on its understanding of the basic national conditions, especially the reality of the poverty-stricken areas and people, the Chinese Government has formulated a policy for development-oriented poverty alleviation that conforms to the reality in China. It sets mainly solving the problem of food and clothing of the rural poor as its basic objective and central task in this regard, starting from the most urgent problems, acting according to its capability, giving priority to key areas, and advancing step by step.

　　制定符合国情的贫困标准

　　Defining the Standard of Poverty in Conformity with the National Conditions

　　中国是一个发展中国家，人口多，底子薄，经济不发达，农村尤其不发达。就中国的贫困地区而言，这种不发达主要表现在：一是基础设施薄弱。贫困地区较为集中的西部地区，虽然土地面积占全国的三分之二以上，但铁路、公路和民航设施所占比重却相对偏低。二是人口增长过快，教育、卫生等基本社会服务水平低。与经济落后成为对比的是，贫困地区往往又是人口增长最快的地区。办学条件差，教育设施落后，适龄儿童失学和辍学率较高，青壮年文盲比例较大。卫生保健水平也很低。三是农业生产条件差，财政收入水平低，公共投入严重不足。1986年国家重点扶持贫困县人均拥有农业机械总动力仅为全国平均水平的50%。1993年国家重点扶持贫困县人均财政收入仅为60元，只相当于全国平均水平的30%左右。

　　China is a developing country with a large population, a meager heritage and an underdeveloped economy, especially in the rural areas. In terms of the poverty-stricken areas in China, the underdevelopment is mainly reflected in the following: First, weak infrastructure. In the western region, where most of these areas are located, although the territory is over two-thirds of the nation's total, the proportions of railways, highways and civil aviation facilities are relatively low. Second, a rapidly growing population, and the low level of education, public health and other basic social services. In contrast to the backward economy, the poverty-stricken areas are usually noted for their rapidly growing populations. Due to the poor conditions for running schools and backward education facilities, a great number of school-age children are unable to go to school or obliged to discontinue their studies, and the illiteracy rate of the young and middle-aged is high. These areas are also characterized by a very low level of health care work. Third, poor agricultural production conditions, low revenue, and seriously inadequate public input. In 1986, the per-capita motive power of agricultural machinery in the counties on the state's priority poverty relief list accounted for only 50 percent of the national average. In 1993, the per-capita revenue in these counties was 60 yuan, only about 30 percent of the national average.

　　上述贫困地区的实际情况，决定了中国扶贫工作要有一个比较现实的贫困标准。中国贫困人口的标准最初是1986年由中国政府有关部门在对6.7万户农村居民家庭消费支出调查的基础上计算得出的，即1985年农村人均纯收入206元的标准。到1990年这一标准相当于300元，2000年为625元。

　　In accordance with the above-mentioned actual conditions, it is necessary to fix a realistic standard of poverty for China's help-the-poor work. The earliest standard was calculated by the relevant government departments in 1986, on the basis of the investigations of the consumption expenditures of 67,000 rural households, i.e., the standard of 206 yuan in per-capita net income in rural areas in 1985. It was equivalent to 300 yuan in 1990 and 625 yuan in 2000.

　　中国的贫困标准是一个能够维持基本生存的最低费用标准，可以确保农村贫困人口最基本的生存需要，因而是客观的，也是符合中国实际的。

　　China's standard of poverty is the standard of the lowest expense to maintain one's basic subsistence. It can guarantee the basic living needs of the rural poor in China and, therefore, is an objective standard and also one that conforms to the reality in China.

　　确定国家重点扶持贫困县

　　Defining the Key Poverty-stricken Counties to Be Aided by the State

　　为了集中使用扶贫资金，有效地扶持贫困人口，中国政府制定了国家重点扶持贫困县的标准，确定了一批国家重点扶持贫困县。

　　To use poverty relief funds in a unified way, and effectively aid the poor and needy, the Chinese Government has formulated the standard of the key poverty-stricken counties to be aided by the state, and identified a number of such counties.

　　中国政府于1986年第一次确定了国家重点扶持贫困县标准：以县为单位，1985年农民年人均纯收入低于150元的县。此后，随着经济的发展，特别是贫困地区经济状况的不断改善，对贫困县的标准也及时作出调整。1994年，中国政府重新调整了国家重点扶持贫困县的标准。具体标准是：以县为单位，凡是1992年农民人均纯收入低于400元的县全部纳入国家重点贫困县扶持范围；凡是1992年人均纯收入高于700元的原国家重点扶持贫困县，一律退出国家扶持范围（根据当时的典型测算，凡是超过700元的县，90%以上的贫困人口基本上解决温饱问题）。依据这个标准，列入《国家八七扶贫攻坚计划》的国家重点扶持的贫困县共有592个，分布在27个省、自治区、直辖市，涵盖了全国72%以上的农村贫困人口。此后，中央政府采取的一系列扶贫开发政策措施，主要是围绕解决国家重点扶持县贫困群众温饱而制定的。

　　The Chinese Government defined the standard of the key poverty-stricken counties to be aided for the first time in 1986: the counties with a net yearly income of less than 150 yuan per peasant in 1985. Subsequently, the standard had been readjusted in keeping with the economic development, especially the constant improvement of the economic conditions of the poverty-stricken areas. The readjusted standard in 1994 was less than 400 yuan in per-capita net income in 1992. So all those counties originally on the priority list where the per-capita net income had exceeded 700 yuan in 1992 were taken off the list. (According to a typical calculation at the time, the problem of food and clothing of over 90 percent of the poverty-stricken people in the counties with the per-capita net income of more than 700 yuan had been basically solved.) According to this standard, 592 counties in 27 provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities directly under the Central Government were listed as the key poverty-stricken counties to be aided in the Seven-Year Priority Poverty Alleviation Program, covering over 72 percent of the rural poor across the country. The series of policies and measures for development-oriented poverty relief work adopted by the Central Government in subsequent years were mainly centered on solving the problem of food and clothing of the people in the counties on the state priority list.

　　通过对贫困县的集中有效扶持，带动了全国农村贫困问题的解决。特别是在扶贫资金方面，国家明确要求，中央的各项扶贫资金都用于这些贫困县。1996年中央政府又进一步对各省、自治区、直辖市提出了最低配套资金比例（30%至50%），以保证地方配套的扶贫资金用在国家重点贫困县。

　　The state has driven forward the solution of poverty in the rural poverty-stricken areas across the country through concentrated and effective aid to the impoverished counties. The state has explicitly demanded that all aid-the-poor funds must be used in the poverty-stricken counties. In 1996, the Central Government further set the minimum proportion of supportive poverty relief funds (30-50 percent) for the provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities to guarantee the local supportive funds to be used in the key counties.

　　扶贫重点向中西部贫困地区倾斜

　　Putting the Stress on the Poverty-stricken Areas in the Central and Western Regions

　　向中西部地区重点倾斜是中国扶贫开发的一项重要战略举措。中国经济发展的区域特征十分明显，东部沿海地区充分利用自身优势率先发展，中部次之，西部相对落后。与此相关，中国农村贫困人口的绝大多数集中在中西部，尤其是西部，并呈块状、片状分布在高原、山地、丘陵、沙漠等地区。这些地区是中国贫困人口最多、贫困程度最深、贫困结构最复杂的地区。在1994年中国政府确定的592个国家重点扶持贫困县中，中西部地区占82%。

　　It is an important strategic measure to favor the central and western regions in China's development-oriented assistance to the poverty-stricken. The regional features of China's economic development are very outstanding. The eastern coastal areas take the lead in economic development, taking full advantage of their own strengths. But the central and western regions are relatively backward. Therefore, China's rural poor are mostly concentrated in the central and western regions, especially in the western region, living in scattered areas in deserts, hills, mountains and plateaus. These regions are characterized by the largest number of poor people, and the deepest degree and most complicated structure of poverty. Of the 592 poverty-stricken counties named by the Chinese Government on its priority poverty relief list in 1994, 82 percent are situated in the central and western regions.

　　从1994年起，中国政府开始调整国家扶贫资金投放的地区结构：把用于沿海经济比较发达省的中央扶贫信贷资金调整出来，集中用于中西部贫困状况严重的省、自治区；中央新增的财政扶贫资金只支持中西部贫困地区。同时，国家从全局着眼，制定优惠政策，积极推动东部地区与西部地区的横向联合和对口扶贫协作。

　　The Chinese Government started to readjust the regional structure of the allocation of the state poverty relief funds in 1994: adjusting the relief credit funds of the Central Government in the coastal economically developed provinces to favor the worst provinces and autonomous regions in the central and western regions, and earmarking the new relief funds from the central budget only for poor areas in those provinces and regions. Keeping the overall situation in mind, the state has formulated preferential policies to actively promote a horizontal union between the eastern and western regions, and the aid-the-poor cooperation between similar departments of different institutions.

　　为加快西部地区的发展，缩小地区间发展差距，近年来中国开始实施西部大开发战略。国家在西部地区优先安排基础设施、生态环境和资源开发等建设项目，并不断加大对西部地区的投入和财政转移支付力度，为推动西部地区发展和贫困人口解决温饱问题发挥了重要作用。

　　Over the past year, China has started to carry out the strategy of large-scale development of the western region to accelerate its development and narrow the gap in development between regions. The state has arranged preferential construction projects of infrastructural facilities, ecological environment and resource development in the western region, steadily increasing its investments and its financial transfer payments to the western region. All these have contributed a great deal to promoting the development

　　加大扶贫开发投入力度

　　Increasing Capital Input for Poverty Reduction

　　近20年来，随着国家财力的增强，中国政府安排的专项扶贫投入不断增加。2000年中央各项扶贫专项资金达到了248亿元，与1980年相比，增加了30倍。中国政府安排的扶贫专项资金累计达到了1680多亿元，其中财政资金800多亿元（含以工代赈资金390多亿元），信贷扶贫资金880亿元。按照中央要求的配套比例（1996年以后为30%至50%），地方政府扶贫投入的力度也相应加大。

　　Over the past 20 years, with the augmentation of the state financial resources, the special aid-the-poor funds arranged by the Chinese Government have constantly increased. In 2000, such funds totaled 24.8 billion yuan, or 31 times as much as in 1980. The accumulative total of such funds have reached over 168 billion yuan, of which more than 80 billion yuan was from financial funds (including over 39 billion yuan of work-relief funds), and 88 billion yuan from credit funds. Local governments have also increased the aid-the-poor funds according to the proportion of supportive funds set by the Central Government (30-50 percent since 1996).

　　中国政府专项扶贫资金主要包括两大类：财政扶贫资金和信贷扶贫资金。财政扶贫资金又包括支援不发达地区发展资金、新增财政扶贫资金、以工代赈资金等。1997年，国务院为了加强对各类扶贫资金的管理，提高使用效益，制定了统一的《国家扶贫资金管理办法》。该办法对各类扶贫资金的扶持对象、条件等作了明确规定，强调各类扶贫资金要根据扶贫攻坚的总体目标和要求，配套使用，形成合力，发挥整体效益。不同渠道的扶贫资金的投入重点是：财政扶贫资金主要用于建设基本农田、兴修小型水利工程、解决人畜饮水困难、修建乡村道路、科技培训和推广农业实用技术等；扶贫信贷资金主要用于增加贫困户当年收入的种养业项目。同时，各级扶贫工作专门机构加强对扶贫资金管理使用的检查、监督。审计部门对扶贫资金的使用情况严格审计，发现问题及时查处。这些措施，对提高扶贫资金使用效益、如期实现基本解决贫困人口温饱问题的目标发挥了关键作用。

　　The special aid-the-poor funds of the Chinese Government mainly include two categories: financial and credit funds. The former includes funds to support the development of the underdeveloped areas, the new financial aid-the-poor funds, and work-relief funds. To tighten the control of the aid-the-poor funds and improve their utilization benefits, the State Council formulated the unified Measures on the Management of the State Poverty Relief Funds in 1997, explicitly providing for the objects and conditions of the aid, with special emphasis on the requirement that these funds should be used complementarily according to the overall objectives and requirements of the Seven-Year Priority Poverty Alleviation Program, so as to form a concerted effort enabling the funds to generate overall benefits. The aid-the-poor funds from various channels should be mainly put into the following fields: The financial funds are to be mainly used in the construction of basic farmland, small irrigation works and country roads, providing drinking water for people and livestock, technical training and the popularization of practical agrotechniques; the credit funds are to be used in assisting the poverty-stricken households in crop cultivation and aquiculture and poultry raising projects to increase their incomes of the same year. At the same time, the special relief departments at all levels are required to strengthen the inspection and supervision of the management and use of the funds. Auditing departments are required to strictly audit the use of the funds and promptly deal with and problem once found. These measures have played a key role in improving the utilization benefits of the aid-the-poor funds and in realizing the objective of basically solving the problem of food and clothing of the poor according to the required schedule.

制定支持贫困地区、贫困农户发展的优惠政策

　　Formulating Preferential Policies to Support the Development of the Poverty-stricken Areas and Peasant Households

　　中国扶贫开发的优惠政策包括帮助贫困户解决温饱和支持贫困地区经济开发两个方面。

　　China's preferential policies for the development-oriented assistance to the poverty-stricken cover two aspects-helping the poor households to solve the problem of food and clothing, and supporting the economic development of the poor areas.

　　帮助贫困农户发展的优惠政策有：对尚未解决温饱问题的贫困户，免除粮食定购任务；根据实际情况，适当延长扶贫贷款的使用期限，放宽抵押和担保条件；按照农业税条例的有关规定，减免农业税和农业特产税。

　　The preferential policies for helping the development of the poverty-stricken peasant households include: Waiving the mandatory state grain procurement quotas of households whose problem of food and clothing has not been solved; appropriately prolonging the utilization time limit of aid-the-poor loans and softening the terms of mortgage and guarantee, according to the actual situation; and reducing or remitting agricultural taxes and taxes on special farm produce according to the relevant provisions of the regulations on agricultural taxation.

　　支持贫困地区经济开发的优惠政策有：中央政府逐步加大对贫困地区的财政转移支付力度，各有关省、自治区、直辖市建立二级转移支付制度，为贫困地区提供财力支持。对贫困县新办企业和发达地区到贫困地区兴办的企业，在三年内免征所得税；根据谁受益、谁负担的原则，适当提高库区建设基金和库区维护基金标准，专项用于解决水库移民的温饱问题。

　　The preferential policies to support the economic development of the poverty-stricken areas include: Gradually strengthening the financial transfer payments to poverty-stricken areas by the Central Government, and establishing a secondary transfer payment system by the relevant provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities to offer financial support to those areas; remitting income tax for three years for new enterprises in the poverty-stricken counties and enterprises established there by people from the developed areas; and, according to the principle of "he who benefits bears the expense," duly raising the standards of the construction and maintenance funds in the reservoir regions and earmarking these funds specially for solving the problem of food and clothing of the reservoir regions' relocated people.

　　落实扶贫工作责任制

　　Carrying Out the Responsibility System for Poverty Relief Work

　　为使扶贫开发工作得到有效开展，中国政府于1986年6月成立了国务院贫困地区经济开发领导小组（1993年更名为国务院扶贫开发领导小组），专门负责组织、领导、协调、监督、检查贫困地区的扶贫开发工作。一些省、自治区、直辖市和地（市）、县级政府也成立了相应的组织机构，负责本地的扶贫开发工作。

　　To effectively implement the development-oriented aid- the-poor work, the Chinese Government established a Leading Group of the State Council for the Economic Development of Poverty-stricken Areas in June 1986 (renamed Leading Group of the State Council for Development-oriented Poverty Relief in 1993), to be responsible for the organization, direction, coordination, supervision and examination of the work in this regard. The governments of some provinces, autonomous regions, municipalities, prefectures (cities) and counties have also established corresponding organizations in charge of the local poverty reduction drive.

　　中国的扶贫开发实行分级负责、以省为主的行政领导扶贫工作责任制。各省、自治区、直辖市，特别是贫困面积较大的省、自治区，都把扶贫开发列入重要议程，根据国家扶贫开发计划制定本地区的具体实施计划。各省、自治区、直辖市的主要负责人亲自抓扶贫工作，并负总责。中央的各项扶贫资金在每年年初一次下达到各省、自治区、直辖市，实行扶贫资金、权力、任务、责任"四个到省（自治区、直辖市）"。所有到省的扶贫资金一律由省级人民政府统一安排使用，并由各有关部门规划和实施项目。

　　China practices the level-by-level responsibility system, with the provincial authority as the main player, in its administrative leadership of the poverty reduction work. The provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities, especially provinces and autonomous regions with large numbers of poverty-stricken areas, have put development-oriented poverty relief high on their agendas, and formulated concrete local implementation plans in line with the state's poverty relief program. The principal leaders of the provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities are required to personally supervise the work and assume overall responsibility. The Central Government issues the relief funds in one lump sum to the provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities at the beginning of every year, and accords the "four assignations" (of funds, powers, tasks and responsibilities) to the provinces, (autonomous regions and municipalities). All the funds assigned to the provinces are to be arranged and used by the people's government at the provincial level, which shall organize the relevant departments to plan and implement the development projects.

　　加强贫困地区农村基层组织建设

　　Strengthening the Building of the Primary Organizations

　　在中国，农村基层组织在动员和组织群众参加改变自身命运的扶贫开发中作用重大。中国政府在扶贫开发中强调加强村级组织建设，以此提高农户的自我组织程度，引导农户积极参与扶贫开发。近年来，中国政府在农村大力推行村委会直接选举制度，根据公开、公平、公正的原则，真正将群众拥护、有能力带领群众改变贫困面貌的人选举为村干部。同时，严格实行村务公开，村级财务的各项收支、扶贫资金的发放使用、承包合同的签订和变更等各项事务，都要向村民公开，接受村民的检查和监督。

　　The rural primary organizations in China have an important role to play in mobilizing and organizing the people to participate in the development-oriented poverty reduction work aimed at reshaping their own destiny. The Chinese Government has stressed improving the rural organizations at the village level in its poverty reduction drive, in order to enhance the degree of self-organization of the peasant households and guide them to bear an active part in the drive. In the past year, the Chinese Government has vigorously carried out the direct election system of villagers' committees in rural areas, so that people who are really supported by the masses and are able to lead them to shake off poverty can be elected as village cadres according to the principle of openness, fairness and justice. At the same time, a policy has been strictly carried out, whereby village affairs, such as revenue and expenditure, the distribution and use of the poverty relief funds, and the conclusion and alteration of contracts are left open to the villagers for their examination and supervision

扶贫开发的主要内容与途径　　

　　 Major Contents and Channels of the Aid-the-Poor Program

　　在扶贫开发的过程中，中国政府坚持以经济建设为中心，发展贫困地区的生产力，走开发式扶贫的道路，通过多种方式和途径，采取综合配套措施，帮助农村贫困人口脱贫。

　　In carrying out its aid-the-poor program, the Chinese Government has persistently centered its efforts on economic construction, developing the productive forces of poverty-stricken areas, and combining development with relief. It aims at helping the rural poor to shake off poverty through various ways and channels, and by adopting comprehensive coordinative measures.

　　坚持开发式扶贫的方针

　　Adhering to the Policy of Development-oriented Poverty Alleviation

　　开发式扶贫是对过去传统的分散救济式扶贫的改革与调整，是中国政府农村扶贫政策的核心和基础。坚持开发式扶贫的方针，就是以经济建设为中心，支持、鼓励贫困地区干部群众改善生产条件，开发当地资源，发展商品生产，增强自我积累和自我发展能力。

　　Providing development-oriented aid to the poor is a reform of and adjustment to the old, traditional way of dispersed relief, forming the core and basis of the Chinese Government's aid-the-rural-poor policy. Adhering to the policy of development- oriented aid means centering efforts on economic construction, supporting and encouraging cadres and ordinary people in poor areas to improve their production conditions, exploit local resources, develop commodity production, and strengthen their ability to accumulate funds and develop by themselves.

　　开发式扶贫方针主要包括五个方面内容：第一，倡导和鼓励自力更生、艰苦奋斗的精神，克服贫困农户中普遍存在的"等、靠、要"思想。第二，针对贫困地区基础设施薄弱、抵御自然灾害能力较差的实际情况，国家安排必要的以工代赈资金，鼓励、支持贫困农户投工投劳，开展农田、水利、公路等方面的基础设施建设，改善生产条件。第三，国家安排优惠的扶贫专项贴息贷款，制定相关优惠政策，重点帮助贫困地区、贫困农户发展以市场为导向的种植业、养殖业以及相应的加工业项目，促进增产增收。第四，开展农业先进实用技术培训，提高贫困农户的科技文化素质，增强自我发展能力。第五，扶贫开发与水土保持、环境保护、生态建设相结合，实施可持续发展战略，增强贫困地区和贫困农户的发展后劲。

　　The policy of development-oriented aid mainly consists of the following five aspects: First, advocating and encouraging the spirit of self-reliance and hard work, and helping poor peasant households overcome the common attitude of "waiting for, relying on and requesting" aid. Second, considering that the poor areas are weak in infrastructure and capability for defense against natural disasters, the state encourages and supports poor peasant households to put labor into the construction of infrastructure, such as farmland, irrigation works and highways, by arranging necessary work-relief funds, so as to improve the conditions for developing production. Third, the state provides concessional loans for special aid items at discounted interest, and formulates preferential policies, centering on helping the poverty-stricken areas and peasant households develop market-oriented crop cultivation, aquiculture and poultry raising and corresponding processing industries, so as to increase production and incomes. Fourth, conducting training in advanced practical agrotechiques, in order to improve poor peasant households' sci-tech and cultural levels, and strengthening their ability to develop by themselves. Fifth, combining development-oriented aid with soil and water conservation, environmental protection and ecological construction, implementing the strategy of sustainable development, and helping poor areas and peasant households enhance their ability to make further progress.

　　强调扶贫到村到户

    Bringing Aid Within the Reach of Individual Villages and Households

　　二十世纪九十年代以来，根据贫困地区的实际情况，中国的扶贫开发着重扶贫到村到户。国家不仅将扶贫到户作为一项重要措施，而且把解决贫困农户温饱的各项指标也量化到户。 中国在实践中探索出许多行之有效的扶贫到户方式：一是干部包扶到户，即组织各级干部与贫困农户结成"一帮一"对子，采取签订责任状等方式，明确干部包扶任务。二是实体带动、效益到户，即通过鼓励企业与农户合作建立农产品生产加工基地，实现农产品产、供、销的良性循环。三是异地开发、移民到户，即本着自愿的原则，将贫困农户从生产生活条件极其恶劣的地区搬迁到条件较好的地区，实现异地脱贫。四是社会各界帮扶到户，即组织社会各界对贫困农户进行帮扶。

　　Since the beginning of the 1990s, considering the reality of the poverty-stricken areas, China has paid special attention to making aid accessible to individual villages and households, as an important measure. The state has also used the individual household as the basic unit in quantifying the various indices for solving the poor peasant households' problem of food and clothing.

　　小额信贷是扶贫到户的关键措施之一。中国政府在借鉴其他国家和国际组织扶贫经验的基础上，积极组织小额信贷扶贫到户，取得了很好的效果。到1999年，全国投入的资金总量达30亿元，覆盖240多万贫困农户。同时，中国小额信贷的试点、推广初步实现了本土化和规范化，进入了扩大范围、扩大规模的新阶段。

　　China has developed many effective ways in the practice of work in this regard: First, assigning individual households to cadres, which means organizing cadres at all levels to form a "one helps one" team with individual poor peasant households, and making clear the cadres' duties in this respect by signing a responsibility contract or through other ways. Second, households raise their incomes through the help of economic entities, which means realizing a benign circle of production, supply and marketing of agricultural products by encouraging enterprises to cooperate with peasant households in setting up bases for producing or processing agricultural products. Third, development through relocation, whereby poor households are persuaded to move from their native places, where production and living conditions are exceptionally bad, to places with better conditions, so as to help lift them out of poverty. Fourth, encouraging all social sectors to aid poor peasant households. One of the key measures for making aid accessible to individual households is providing small-amount credit loans. Having learned from the aid-the-poor experiences of other countries and international organizations, the Chinese Government has achieved good results in providing poor households with small-amount credit loans. By 1999, a total of three billion yuan had been loaned to over 2.4 million poor peasant households. At the same time, China has primarily standardized the experimentation with and promotion of small-amount credit loans, and has entered the new stage of enlarging the involved population, as well as the scale.

　　重视科技教育扶贫

　　Aiding the Poor with Technology and Education

　　从1986年开始，中国政府有关部门根据国家扶贫开发的总体战略和要求，适时提出科技扶贫的目标、措施和实施办法，并于1996年提出《1996-2000年全国科技扶贫规划纲要》，加强对科技扶贫的政策指导。

　　In 1986, in accordance with the state's general strategy and requirements in poverty relief, relevant authorities of the Chinese Government proposed the aim, measures and implementation methods of aiding the poor with technology. In 1996, they formulated an Outline of the National Plan for Aiding the Poor with Technology (1996-2000), strengthening the policy guidance for aid along this line.

　　为进一步增强贫困地区反贫困的能力，中国政府专项安排科技扶贫资金，用于优良品种和先进实用技术的引进、试验、示范、推广，以及科技培训等。1995年以来，国家教委和财政部联合组织实施了"国家贫困地区义务教育工程"，投入资金超过100亿元，重点投向国定贫困县、部分省定贫困县、革命老区和少数民族地区，帮助这些地区普及九年义务教育。

　　In order to further enhance the ability of poverty-stricken areas to fight poverty, the Chinese Government has provided special funds for aiding the poor with technology, which have been used for introducing, testing, demonstrating and promoting improved seed strains and advanced practical technologies, and for conducting technological training. Since 1995, the State Education Commission and the Ministry of Finance have jointly implemented the National Project of Compulsory Education in Poor Areas, through which over 10 billion yuan has been provided for all state-designated poor counties, some province-designated poor counties, old revolutionary base areas and ethnic minority areas, to help them institute the national nine-year compulsory education.

　　中国政府动员大专院校、科研院所在贫困地区积极推广农业先进实用技术，组织科技人员到贫困地区挂职任教，组织科研单位到贫困乡、村宣传普及农业技术。这些措施有效地改变了贫困地区落后的生产方式，提高了土地的产出率，迅速增加了农民的收入。15年来，仅科技部就向贫困地区提供技术人员3万人次，实施科技扶贫示范项目580个，建立各种科技示范点1500个，解决关键性技术200多个，向贫困地区推广适用技术2000多项。

　　The Chinese Government encourages institutions of higher learning and scientific research institutes to promote advanced practical agrotechniques in poor areas, and has organized scientific and technological personnel and research institutions to teach in poor areas or promote agrotechniques in poor townships or villages. These measures have effectively changed the backward modes of production in these areas, increased the yield of farmland, and swiftly raised peasants' incomes. In the past 15 years, the Ministry of Science and Technology has sent, by turnstile count, 30,000 technicians to poor areas, implemented 580 model projects of aiding the poor with technology, set up 1,500 technological demonstration centers, solved over 200 key technological problems, and promoted over 2,000 suitable techniques in poor areas.

动员和组织社会各界参与扶贫

　　Mobilizing and Organizing All Social Sectors to Participate in Aiding the Poor

　　在扶贫开发中，政府各部门根据中央政府的统一要求，从尽快解决贫困人口温饱问题的大局和贫困地区的实际情况出发，积极参与扶贫开发。政府有关部门分别制定了本部门、本系统的扶贫开发具体实施方案，提出了一系列有利于贫困地区发展和贫困群众脱贫的优惠政策，并充分发挥各自优势，在资金、物资、技术上向贫困地区倾斜，积极为贫困地区的开发建设作出贡献。

　　Based on the uniform requirements of the Central Government, to solve the food and clothing problem of the impoverished population as soon as possible, and in accordance with the actual conditions of the poor areas, government departments have borne an active part in the development- oriented poverty reduction drive. They have drawn up specific implementation plans for their own technological aid projects, employing a series of favorable policies to help poor areas to develop and poor people to shake off poverty. Making full use of their own advantages, these departments have contributed to the development and construction in poor areas by favoring them in providing funds, materials and technology.

　　自二十世纪八十年代中期以来，包括中央国家机关、企事业单位、民主党派及人民团体等社会各界参与扶贫开发的部门、单位不断增多，规模不断扩大。各帮扶部门和单位都有特定的帮扶对象和明确的任务，要求没有脱贫就不脱钩。到2000年底，定点帮扶的部门和单位达到138个，共派出3000多名干部到贫困县挂职扶贫，直接投入资金44亿元，帮助贫困地区引进国内外各种资金105亿元。

　　Since the mid-1980s, more and more units and organizations have participated in development-oriented aid-the-poor work, including central government organs, enterprises and institutions, non-Communist parties and mass organizations, and the scale has been steadily enlarged. Each department or organization has a specific target of aid and definite responsibilities, keeping up its aid until the aided have shaken off poverty. By the end of 2000, the number of such units and organizations had reached 138, involving over 3,000 cadres, 4.4 billion yuan in direct investment, and 10.5 billion yuan in funds from domestic and overseas sources.

　　各省、自治区、直辖市以及贫困地区也积极开展定点扶贫工作。1995至1999年，各地先后有4.6万名干部到贫困县、村挂职扶贫，直接投入资金和物资折合人民币达87.62亿元；帮助引进各类扶持资金103亿元，实施扶贫项目2万余个，帮助引进技术人才1.3万余名，引进技术近7000项。

　　The provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities, and the poor areas themselves have put energetic efforts into the poverty reduction work in specific areas. From 1995 to 1999, about 46,000 cadres were sent to do aid-the-poor work in poor counties and villages; as much as 8.762 billion yuan worth was directly invested, both in cash and in kind; a total of 10.3 billion yuan in support funds was derived from other sources; over 20,000 aid projects were launched; and over 13,000 technicians and nearly 7,000 items of technology were introduced.

　　此外，各社会组织、民间团体和私营企业也积极开展“希望工程”、“光彩事业”、“文化扶贫”、“幸福工程”、“春蕾计划”、“青年志愿者支教扶贫接力计划”、“贫困农户自立工程”等多种形式的扶贫活动。以资助贫困失学儿童入学为目的的“希望工程”，自1989年以来累计接受海内外捐款近19亿元，资助建设希望小学8355所，资助失学儿童近230万名。

　　In addition, social organizations, non-governmental organizations and private enterprises have actively initiated or participated in a wide spectrum of aid-the-poor activities, such as the Hope Project, Cause of Glory, Aid-the-Poor Through Culture, Happiness Project, Spring Buds Program, Young Volunteers' Project of Supporting Education in Poor Areas in Relays, and Poor Peasant Households' Self-Support Project. A project aimed at helping children from poor families to go to school, the Hope Project has received a total donation of nearly 1.9 billion yuan from both home and abroad since its inauguration in 1989, with which to fund the establishment of 8,355 Hope schools and help nearly 2.3 million children to go to school.

开展东西部协作扶贫
Cooperation of the Eastern and Western Regions in the Aid-the-Poor Work

　　在扶贫开发中，中国采取东部较发达省市对口支持西部省、自治区发展的方式，加快西部贫困地区脱贫步伐。具体执行情况是：北京帮扶内蒙古，天津帮扶甘肃，上海帮扶云南，广东帮扶广西，江苏帮扶陕西，浙江帮扶四川，山东帮扶新疆，辽宁帮扶青海，福建帮扶宁夏，大连、青岛、深圳、宁波帮扶贵州。协作双方根据"优势互补、互惠互利、长期合作、共同发展"的原则，在企业合作、项目援助、人才交流等方面开展了多层次、全方位的扶贫协作。东西部扶贫协作以改变贫困地区生产条件和生态环境，解决贫困地区群众温饱问题为重点，遵循市场经济规律，充分运用科学技术，广泛动员社会各界力量，在努力扩大对口帮扶的同时，开展各种形式的经济合作。

　　In order to speed up the pace of eliminating poverty in the western region, China has adopted the idea of getting the more-developed provinces and municipalities in the east to support the development of their western counterparts. This scheme is carried out as follows: Beijing helps Inner Mongolia; Tianjin helps Gansu; Shanghai helps Yunnan; Guangdong helps Guangxi; Jiangsu helps Shaanxi; Zhejiang helps Sichuan; Shandong helps Xinjiang; Liaoning helps Qinghai; Fujian helps Ningxia; and the cities of Dalian, Qingdao, Shenzhen and Ningbo help Guizhou. Based on the principles of "taking advantages of each other's strengths, mutual benefit, long-term cooperation and common development," the cooperating parties have joined efforts in all aspects and at multiple levels, including cooperation between enterprises, project aid, and personnel exchange. Such cooperation between the eastern and western regions focuses on improving the production conditions and ecological environments in the poor areas as well as solving the food and clothing problem in these areas. Following the laws of the market economy, making full use of science and technology, and mobilizing all social forces, various forms of economic cooperation have been conducted, while efforts are being made to realize more such cooperation.

　　近年来，东部13个省市政府和社会各界累计捐款、捐物折款近21.4亿元，双方签订项目协议5745个，协议投资280多亿元，实现投资40多亿元，从贫困地区输出劳动力51.7万人。此外，东西部地区在干部交流、人才培训、援建学校、建设基本农田、修筑公路、解决人畜饮水困难等方面也开展了协作。1992年以来，国家教委、国家民委组织发达省市对口支援民族、贫困地区教育工作，新建、改建中小学1400所，救助失学儿童近4万人，培养和培训中小学教师1.6万人次。

　　In the past year, nearly 2.14 billion yuan-worth of donated funds and materials have been provided by the governments of 13 provinces and municipalities and various social sectors in the east; 5,745 project agreements have been signed; investments of over 28 billion yuan have been agreed upon, of which over four billion yuan has already been invested; and 517,000 workers have been transferred from the poor areas. The eastern and western regions have also cooperated in cadre exchange, personnel training, establishing schools, building basic farmland and highways, easing the shortage of drinking water for people and livestock, and so on. Since 1992, the State Education Commission and State Ethnic Affairs Commission have organized the more developed provinces and municipalities to support education work in the poor areas and areas inhabited by ethnic minorities, building or rebuilding 1,400 primary and secondary schools, helping nearly 40,000 children to go to school, and training 16,000 primary and secondary school teachers.

　　实施自愿移民扶贫开发

　　Aiding the Poor by Encouraging Migration

　　国家鼓励和支持生存条件极其恶劣地区的贫困农户通过移民搬迁、异地开发的方式，开辟解决温饱的新途径。为此，中国政府强调，自愿移民搬迁的贫困人口除享受扶贫开发的优惠政策外，各地要制定具体政策措施，提供各种优惠条件，确保搬迁一户解决一户温饱。中国的移民扶贫开发，按照群众自愿、就近安置、量力而行、适当补助四项原则进行。

　　The state encourages and supports poor peasant households to move out of areas with extremely difficult living conditions to more favorable areas, which is a new way to solve their food and clothing problem. The Chinese Government has stressed that the poor population migrating voluntarily, in addition to enjoying the state's preferential aid-the-poor policies, should be helped by local governments through their specific measures and preferential terms, to guarantee that each migrating household's food and clothing problem is solved. This work has been undertaken according to the principles of migration by free will, resettlement in the nearest possible areas, acting within the limit of resources, and the provision of appropriate subsidies.

　　中国实施移民扶贫开发的主要做法有：一是插户移民。即由贫困户自行投亲靠友，分散安置，政府给予一定补助。二是政府建移民开发基地安置移民。既要保证可稳定解决迁入户的温饱问题，又要保证不破坏迁入地的生态环境。三是吊庄移民。即采取搬迁初期两头有家的形式，待移民点得到开发，生产生活基本稳定后再完全搬迁。近年来，通过多种方式和途径迁移安置了260万贫困人口，其中已稳定在迁入地居住的达240万，使全国需要移民搬迁的贫困人口由750万减少到500万左右。

　　The major methods of aiding the poor by migration include: First, governments subsidize the poor households for migrating and resettling near their relatives or friends. Second, governments establish migrants' settlements, and make sure that their food and clothing problem is solved without damaging the ecological environment around the settlements. Third, the migrants are allowed to keep their old homes until the new settlements are well in shape for stable production and habitation. In the past year, about 2.6 million of the poor have been relocated in various ways and through various channels, among whom 2.4 million have already settled down. The total poor population that needs to migrate has shrunk from 7.5 million to about five million.

输出贫困地区劳动力

　　Transferring Labor from Poor Areas

　　为了帮助贫困地区劳动力充分就业并增加收入，国家鼓励并组织具备条件的贫困地区开展劳务输出。劳务输出不仅有助于使贫困地区劳动力实现就业和增加收入，更重要的是劳动者通过异地就业可以学到新技术、新生活方式、新工作方法，开阔眼界，增强信心，提高自我发展能力。许多西部外出务工人员已经成为向西部传播东部生产生活方式以及文化和技术的使者。四川是全国劳务输出最多的省份，每年有800多万人实现异地就业，通过邮局寄回家乡的资金每年约200亿元。

　　To increase the chances of employment and the income of workers in poor areas, the state encourages and organizes the transfer of labor from areas favorable for such transfer. Such labor transfer will not only increase the employment and income of workers from the poor areas, but, more importantly, it will also enable these people to learn new technologies, life-styles and working methods from the places where they work, to broaden their outlook, increase their self-confidence and improve their ability to develop independently. Many migrant workers from the western region have become envoys for spreading in the western region the modes of production, life-styles, culture and technologies from the more developed eastern region. In Sichuan Province, there are over eight million workers employed outside the province each year, ranking first in the country, and every year they send about 20 billion yuan back to their native places.

　　实行扶贫开发与生态环境保护、计划生育相结合

　　Combining Poverty Reduction with Eco-environmental Protection and Family Planning

　　在贫困地区的开发中，中国政府重视生态环境的保护，鼓励农民发展生态农业、环保农业。通过科技扶贫，在一定程度上改变了贫困地区以破坏生态为代价的掠夺性生产，促进了贫困地区的可持续发展。

　　While developing the poor areas, the Chinese Government pays close attention to the protection of the ecological environment, and encourages peasants to develop ecologically- and environmentally-friendly agriculture. Poverty reduction by reliance on science and technology has helped to change the previous way of production by indiscriminate means at the expense of the ecology in poor areas, and gone a long way toward promoting sustainable development in these areas.

　　人口数量过多、增长过快、素质偏低等诸因素严重制约了贫困地区经济社会的发展和农民解决温饱、脱贫致富的步伐。中国政府特别强调转变贫困地区群众的生育观念，积极倡导贫困地区的农民实行计划生育，把扶贫开发与计划生育结合起来。这对贫困地区人口与经济社会协调发展和可持续发展产生了重要影响。

　　The large quantity, high growth and low quality of the population in the poor areas have seriously handicapped economic and social development, the efforts to solve the food and clothing problem, and the peasants' attempts to shake off poverty and get rich. The Chinese Government specially emphasizes changing the people's ideas on the family in the poor areas, and encourages them to closely adhere to the national family planning policy. The combination of family planning with poverty reduction has produced important effects on the coordinated development of the population, economy and society and the sustainable development of the impoverished areas.

    开展扶贫领域的国际交流与合作

　　Promoting International Exchange and Cooperation in Aid-the-Poor Work

　　中国的扶贫开发主要依靠自己的力量，同时中国政府重视与国际社会在扶贫领域的交流与合作。中国政府认为，积极开展扶贫领域的国际交流与合作，不仅有利于加快解决本国贫困人口的温饱问题，而且有助于通过借鉴国际社会多年积累的扶贫经验和成功的扶贫方式，提高中国扶贫开发的整体水平。自二十世纪九十年代以来，中国政府积极探索借鉴国际反贫困经验，不断扩大与国际组织在扶贫领域的合作，并有了明显进展。

　　The Chinese Government carries out its aid-the-poor program mainly by its own efforts, at the same time paying attention to exchange and cooperation with the international community in this sphere of endeavor. The Chinese Government believes that promoting such exchange and cooperation will not only help speed up the solving of the food and clothing problem of its own poor population, but it will also help raise the general level of China's aid-the-poor work by learning from the international community its long years of experience and successful methods in aiding the poor. Since the 1990s, the Chinese Government has actively studied the international anti-poverty experience, and continuously widened its cooperation with international organizations in work in this particular field, in which it has made obvious progress.

　　在扶贫领域，世界银行与中国的合作最早，投入规模最大。世界银行与中国目前已经开展的西南、秦巴、西部三期扶贫贷款项目，援助总规模达6.1亿美元，覆盖9个省区、91个贫困县，800多万贫困人口。其中中国西南世界银行贷款项目于1995年7月开始在云南、贵州、广西三省(区)最贫困的35个国定贫困县实施。项目总投资42.3亿元，其中利用世行贷款2.475亿美元，国内相应的配套资金为21.8亿元。项目建设主要包括大农业、基础设施建设、第二第三产业开发、劳务输出、教育卫生和贫困监测等方面。项目建成后将使项目区350万贫困人口稳定解决温饱问题。这一项目是中国第一个跨省区、跨行业、综合性的扶贫开发项目，也是迄今为止利用外资规模最大的扶贫项目。目前项目进展顺利，并已进入收尾阶段。

　　The World Bank was the first international body to cooperate with the Chinese Government in aid-the-poor work, and has made the largest investment so far. The three-stage aid-the-poor loan project jointly carried out by the World Bank and China in the southwestern areas, the Qinling and Daba mountain areas and the western region has involved a total of 610 million US dollars, covering nine provinces and autonomous regions, 91 poverty-stricken counties and over eight million poor people. In July 1995, the Southwestern China-World Bank Loan Project started in the 35 state-designated poorest counties in Yunnan and Guizhou provinces and the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region. Of the total investment of 4.23 billion yuan, 247.5 million US dollars were in the form of loans from the World Bank; the Chinese Government provided a supporting fund of 2.18 billion yuan. This project mainly involved mega-agriculture, infrastructure, development of secondary and tertiary industries, labor service export, education, health care and poverty monitoring. The project is expected to eventually solve the food and clothing problem of 3.5 million needy people. This inter-province, inter-industry comprehensive aid project is the largest of its kind in China, and one that has made use of the largest amount of foreign funds so far. Having progressed smoothly, the project is currently in its phase-out period.

　　此外，一些国家、国际组织和非政府组织也与中国在扶贫领域开展了广泛的合作。联合国开发计划署在中国开展了一些扶贫开发项目和研究项目。欧盟、英国政府、荷兰政府、日本政府、德国技术合作公司、亚洲开发银行、福特基金会、日本凯尔、日本协力银行、世界宣明会、香港乐施会等也都在中国开展了扶贫开发项目，并取得了很好的成效。

　　In addition, some other countries, international organizations and non-governmental organizations have also conducted a wide range of cooperation with China in aid-the-poor work. The United Nations Development Program has carried out some aid and research projects in China. Other governments and organizations that have successfully carried out aid-the-poor projects in China include the European Union, the governments of Great Britain, the Netherlands and Japan, the German GTZ, the Asian Development Bank, the Ford Foundation, the CARE of Japan, the Japan Bank for International Cooperation, the World Vision International, and the Hong Kong Oxfam.

特殊贫困群体的扶贫开发　　

　　 The Aid-the-Poor Program for the Special Groups Among the Impoverished

　　少数民族、残疾人和妇女，是中国农村贫困人口中的特殊贫困群体。中国政府重视这些特殊贫困群体的扶贫开发工作，采取各种有效措施帮助他们与其他贫困人口同时脱贫。

　　Ethnic minorities, the disabled and women are special groups among China's impoverished rural population. The Chinese Government pays great attention to poverty alleviation work for these special groups, adopting effective measures to help them get rid of poverty together with other impoverished people.

　　少数民族和民族地区扶贫开发

　　The Poverty Alleviation Program for Ethnic Minorities and Minority Areas

　　中国是一个多民族国家。由于历史、社会和自然条件等原因，相当部分少数民族地区经济发展落后，社会发育程度较低。据中国有关部门统计，到1994年，少数民族贫困地区主要分布在中国的西部，涉及5个自治区、20个自治州、49个自治县。全国348个少数民族自治县中有257个被列为国家重点扶持贫困县。针对这一情况，中国政府十分重视少数民族贫困地区的扶贫开发工作，在政策、措施方面给予了重点倾斜和特殊照顾。

　　China is a multi-ethnic country. Restricted by historical, social and natural conditions, the economic and social development of many ethnic minority areas is backward. According to statistics, by 1994 the impoverished parts of the ethnic minority areas were mainly located in western China, including five autonomous regions, 20 autonomous prefectures and 49 autonomous counties. Among the 348 ethnic minority autonomous counties across the country, 257 were poverty-stricken counties given priority in aid. The Chinese Government lays stress on anti-poverty work in the impoverished parts of the ethnic minority areas and extends to these areas special preferential policies and measures.

　　特殊照顾，提高标准，扩大对少数民族地区的扶持范围。1986年国家重点扶持贫困县标准为1985年农民人均收入低于150元，而民族自治地方县的标准则放宽到低于200元。对于牧区和半农半牧区的少数民族贫困县（旗），扶持标准分别为1984年至1986年三年平均农牧民人均收入低于300元和200元。1994年确定国家重点扶持贫困县时，也对少数民族地区给予了特殊照顾，在全国592个国家重点扶持贫困县中，少数民族贫困县有257个，占43.4%。

　　Giving special treatment to ethnic minorities, raising the standard for relief and aiding more poverty-stricken minority areas. In 1986, the relief standard set by the state for the poor counties on its priority list was less than 150 yuan in the peasants' income per capita in 1985, whereas for autonomous counties, the standard was less than 200 yuan. For the impoverished autonomous counties (banners) in pastoral areas and semi-agricultural and semi-pastoral areas, the standard was less than 300 yuan and 200 yuan per peasant and herdsman, respectively, between 1984 and 1986. In 1994, when the state set about designating the poverty-stricken counties that it should attach greater importance to, it also extended special attention to the ethnic minority areas: Among the 592 impoverished counties on the state's priority list, there were 257 ethnic minority counties, accounting for 43.4 percent.

　　中央资金重点向少数民族地区倾斜。为加大对少数民族地区的扶持力度，不仅扶贫资金的分配重点向西藏等五个自治区以及云南、贵州、青海等少数民族人口较多的西部省份倾斜，而且还专门安排“少数民族发展资金”等专项资金，解决少数民族和民族地区的特殊困难和问题。据统计，从1994年到2000年，国家共向内蒙古、广西、西藏、宁夏、新疆五个自治区和贵州、云南、青海三个少数民族人口较多的省投入资金432.53亿元，占全国总投资的38.4%。其中，财政资金194.15亿元（含以工代赈资金127.22亿元），占全国的40%；信贷资金238.38亿元，占全国的37.8%。在西藏，近六年来，国家和地方政府先后投入资金12.2亿元，实施了多个扶贫开发建设项目。

    Favoring ethnic minority areas in appropriating funds from the central budget. To intensify the aid to ethnic minority areas, the state not only favors Tibet and the other four autonomous regions and western provinces with large ethnic minority populations such as Yunnan, Guizhou and Qinghai in allocating aid-the-poor funds, but it has also arranged special funds such as the "Ethnic Minority Development Fund" to solve the special difficulties and problems of the ethnic minorities and minority areas. According to statistics, from 1994 to 2000, the state invested 43.253 billion yuan in the Inner Mongolia, Guangxi, Tibet, Ningxia and Xinjiang autonomous regions, and Guizhou, Yunnan and Qinghai provinces, accounting for 38.4 percent of the nation's total. These included 19.415 billion yuan from the financial funds (including 12.722 billion yuan of work-relief funds), constituting 40 percent of the nation's total; and 23.838 billion yuan in credit funds, constituting 37.8 percent of the nation's total. Over the past six years, the state and local government have invested 1.22 billion yuan in Tibet for launching many anti-poverty projects.

　　经过全社会各方面的共同努力，特别是少数民族地区广大干部群众的艰苦奋斗，中国少数民族贫困地区扶贫开发工作取得了明显成效：

　　Thanks to the common efforts of all sectors of society, especially the persistent hard work of the cadres and people of the minority areas, the poverty-alleviation work has attained marked achievements in the impoverished parts of the ethnic minority areas.

　贫困人口大幅度减少，贫困发生率大幅度下降。据统计，全国五个自治区和三个少数民族人口较多的省，贫困人口由1995年的2086万人下降到1999年的1185万人，四年减少了901万人，贫困发生率由1995年的15.6%下降到1999年的8.7%，下降了6.9个百分点。西藏实施“八七”扶贫攻坚计划以来，由于政府采取了一系列有针对性的特殊扶贫开发和救助措施，使西藏农村牧区长期贫困状况发生根本性变化，贫困人口由二十世纪九十年代初期的48万人减少到目前的7万多人。

　　The impoverished population is shrinking substantially and the impoverishment rate is decreasing sharply. Statistics show that the impoverished populations of the five autonomous regions and three provinces mentioned above declined from 20.86 million in 1995 to 11.85 million in 1999-a decrease of 9.01 million in four years. Moreover, the impoverishment rate declined from 15.6 percent in 1995 to 8.7 percent in 1999-a decrease of 6.9 percentage points. Since the Seven-Year Priority Poverty Alleviation Program was started in Tibet, with clear aims in view the government has adopted a sequence of special measures for poverty-alleviation. As a result, the situation of long-standing poverty in the rural and pastoral areas of Tibet has changed radically, and the impoverished population has decreased from 480,000 in the early 1990s to just over 70,000.

　　农民收入快速增长，生活条件得到改善。五个自治区和三个少数民族人口较多的省的232个国家重点扶持贫困县，农民人均纯收入从1995年的630元增加到1998年的1189元，增长88.7%，高于592个国家重点扶持贫困县平均增长水平28.7个百分点。从1994年到1999年，广西49个贫困县农民人均纯收入由606元上升到1836元，人均粮食产量由310公斤上升到380公斤，在全国民族地区率先实现“八七”扶贫攻坚目标。到2000年底，国家在西藏重点扶持的18个贫困县农牧民人均纯收入达1316元，已接近全国平均水平。新疆牧区牧民定居半定居比例由1994年的49.5%上升到1999年的80%。

　　The peasants' incomes are increasing rapidly, and their living conditions are improving. In the 232 poverty-stricken counties included in the state's priority aid in the five autonomous regions and three provinces with large ethnic minority populations, the net income per capita of the peasants rose from 630 yuan in 1995 to 1,189 yuan in 1998-an increase of 88.7 percent, or 28.7 percentage points higher than the average increase level of the total 592 impoverished counties receiving the state's priority aid. From 1994 to 1999, the net income of the peasants per capita in the 49 impoverished counties in Guangxi rose from 606 yuan to 1,836 yuan, and the grain yield per capita rose from 310 kg to 380 kg, becoming the first among the ethnic minority areas to reach the objectives of the Seven-Year Priority Poverty Alleviation Program. By the end of 2000, the net income of the peasants and herdsmen per capita in the 18 counties in Tibet receiving state priority aid had reached 1,316 yuan, approaching the nation's average. In Xinjiang, the settlement and semi-settlement rate of the herdsmen rose from 49.5 percent in 1994 to 80 percent in 1999.

　　基础设施明显改善，社会事业不断发展。据不完全统计，从1994年到1999年，五个自治区和三个少数民族人口较多的省，共解决了2163.5万人、2934.7万头大牲畜的饮水困难；新增基本农田2626.5万亩，围栏草场672万亩；修建县、乡、村公路6.75万公里。到1999年底，广西全区实现了乡乡通公路，49个贫困县中95％的村通了汽车，全区95％的村通了电并基本实现通电视，85％的村通了电话。少数民族贫困地区教育、卫生等各项社会事业也得到了较快的发展。

　　Infrastructure facilities are improving remarkably and social undertakings are developing steadily. According to incomplete statistics, from 1994 to 1999, the five autonomous regions and three provinces with large ethnic minority populations solved the problem of drinking water for 21.635 million people and 29.347 million draught animals. A total of 26.265 million mu of basic farmland was developed, and 6.72 million mu of meadows were fenced in for livestock grazing. Also, 67,500 km of roads connecting counties, townships and villages were constructed. By the end of 1999, all the townships in Guangxi were connected by roads; some 95 percent of the villages in the 49 poverty-stricken counties were accessible by automobile; 95 percent of the villages had access to electricity and TV programs; and 85 percent of the villages had telephone lines. Besides, education, public health and other social undertakings have developed rapidly in the impoverished parts of the ethnic minority areas.

　　残疾人扶贫

　　Aid to the Poverty-stricken Disabled

　　残疾人是一个特殊而困难的社会群体。中国现有6000多万残疾人，约占总人口的5%，其中80%生活在农村。他们当中有相当数量因自身残疾的影响以及外界环境的障碍，生活处于贫困状态。据调查测算，1992年全国有贫困残疾人约2000万。在农村的贫困残疾人中，30%生活在592个国定贫困县。中国政府历来重视和关心残疾人扶贫工作，采取了一系列有效措施：

　　The disabled form a special social group in straitened circumstances. Currently, there are over 60 million disabled in China, accounting for approximately five percent of the total population. Of them, 80 percent live in the rural areas, and a large number live in poverty due to their own disability and the influence of the external environment. It is estimated that in 1992 there were about 20 million impoverished disabled people in China. Among the disabled poor in the rural areas, 30 percent lived in the 592 state-designated impoverished counties. The Chinese Government has all along attached great importance to and shown concern about poverty alleviation for the disabled, and has adopted a series of effective measures in this regard:

　　将残疾人扶贫作为一项重要内容列入国家扶贫计划，统筹安排，统一组织，同步实施。经中国政府批准的《中国残疾人事业“八五”计划纲要》和《中国残疾人事业“九五”计划纲要》，都有残疾人扶贫配套实施方案。1998年国家专门制定《残疾人扶贫攻坚计划（1998-2000年）》，确定残疾人扶贫的目标、任务、途径、措施、政策，对残疾人扶贫工作进行全面部署。地方各级政府也将残疾人作为重点扶持对象，制定本地残疾人扶贫攻坚计划，组织各有关部门规划和实施项目，落实责任，并在人力、财力、物力等方面给予大力支持。

　　Making poverty alleviation for the disabled an important part of the state's poverty alleviation program. The state makes unified arrangements to implement poverty alleviation work for the disabled. Both the Outline of the Work for the Disabled in China During the Eighth Five-Year Plan Period and the Outline of the Work for the Disabled in China During the Ninth Five-Year Plan Period approved by the Chinese Government contain coordinated implementation schemes for poverty alleviation for the disabled. In 1998, the state specially formulated the Priority Poverty Alleviation Program for the Disabled (1998-2000) to ensure comprehensive arrangements for poverty alleviation for the disabled, fixing the objectives, tasks, methods, measures and policies for work in this connection. The local governments at various levels also give priority aid to the disabled, drawing up plans, implementing projects, ascertaining responsibilities, and providing energetic manpower, financial and material support.

　　安排专项贷款，开展残疾人扶贫。从1992年起，国家设立康复扶贫专项贷款，对贫困残疾人予以扶持。到2000年，累计投放贷款26亿元。近年来，各地还大力推广小额信贷扶贫到户、到人，将小额信贷作为残疾人扶贫的主要方式。河南、贵州、内蒙古、云南、黑龙江等15个省（自治区、直辖市）在残疾人专项扶贫中，推行小额信贷的比例已超过70%。

　　Offering special loans to alleviate poverty among the disabled. In 1992, the state established a special rehabilitation and poverty alleviation loan to aid the impoverished disabled. By 2000, 2.6 billion yuan had been loaned to such people. In the past year, great efforts have been made to provide small-amount credit loans for individual households and persons, which has become a major method of helping the disabled shake off poverty. In Henan, Guizhou, Inner Mongolia, Yunnan, Heilongjiang and ten other provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities, such loans have exceeded 70 percent.

　　加强基层残联扶贫服务体系建设，为农村残疾人提供及时、有效的服务。1998年3月国务院残疾人工作协调委员会作出了《关于加强基层残联建设的决定》。国务院扶贫办等六部门还制定了《农村残疾人扶贫开发实施办法（1998-2000年）》，对加强基层残联服务体系建设提出要求。经过几年的努力，到2000年底，全国已建立县级残疾人服务社2238个，占县（市、区）总数的80.2%；乡镇残疾人服务社28427个，占乡镇总数的60%，初步形成了农村基层残疾人扶贫服务体系，为残疾人扶贫工作提供了重要的组织保障。

　　Strengthening the building of the poverty alleviation service system of the China Disabled Persons' Federation at the grassroots level to provide prompt and effective service for the rural disabled. In March 1998, the Coordinating Committee for the Disabled-related Work of the State Council issued the Decisions on Strengthening the Building of the China Disabled Persons' Federation at the Grassroots Level. Besides, six departments under the State Council, including the Poverty Alleviation Office, have adopted the Measures for the Implementation of the Development-oriented Poverty Alleviation Projects for the Disabled in the Rural Areas (1998-2000), setting forth the requirements in strengthening the building of the service system of the China Disabled Persons' Federation at the grassroots level. Through several years of efforts, by the end of 2000 some 80.2 percent of the counties (cities and municipal districts) across the country had established 2,238 county-level service centers for the disabled; and 60 percent of the total townships had set up 28,427 township-level service centers. A grassroots poverty alleviation service system for the disabled has taken initial shape in the countryside, providing an important organizational guarantee for aiding the disabled.

　　选择适合残疾人特点的扶贫开发项目和方式。针对残疾人参加生产劳动有很多困难，残疾人扶贫开发的重点是扶持有助于直接解决农村贫困残疾人温饱问题的种植业、养植业、手工业和家庭副业；选择适合当地市场经济发展需要，与地方支柱产业相配套，兼顾残疾人特点的项目；选择资金覆盖面大、效益到户率高、与直接提高贫困残疾人收入有密切联系的项目。

　　Choosing suitable poverty alleviation projects and methods for the disabled. In view of the fact that the disabled have many difficulties participating in productive labor, stress should be laid on supporting economic sectors that can directly help tackle the food and clothing problem for the poor disabled in the rural areas. Such sectors include crop cultivation, aquiculture, poultry raising, handicrafts and household sideline production; projects that meet the needs of the development of the local market economy and coordinate with the local pillar industries and are well suited to the characteristics of the disabled; and projects with wide fund coverage and marked results for individual households and closely related to direct income increase for the impoverished disabled.

　　经过努力，中国贫困残疾人口数量明显减少，近十年有1000万人解决了温饱，到2000年底贫困残疾人口下降到979万人。

　　As a result of great efforts made, the number of the disabled poor in China had dropped dramatically, as evidenced by the fact that the problem of food and clothing had been solved for ten million disabled in the previous ten years, leaving only 9.79 million still beset by this problem by the end of 2000.

妇女扶贫

　　Aid for Poverty-stricken Women

　　中国政府十分重视农村妇女脱困问题，1994年《国家八七扶贫攻坚计划》明确提出，要进一步动员贫困地区妇女积极参与脱贫行动。

　　The Chinese Government has paid great attention to helping rural women shake off poverty. The Seven-Year Priority Poverty Alleviation Program of 1994 clearly stipulates that further efforts should be made to mobilize the women of the poverty-stricken areas to take an active part in the fight against poverty.

　　近年来，在各级政府和有关组织的支持和带动下，农村贫困地区妇女积极参加“双学双比”（学文化、学技术，比成绩、比贡献）活动，众多妇女脱盲，一些妇女接受了实用技术培训并获得农民技术员职称，成为贫困地区依靠科技发展生产的带头人。中国最大的妇女组织中华全国妇女联合会，通过建立扶贫联系点、联系户，开展文化技术培训和小额信贷，组织贫困地区妇女劳务输出、手拉手互助，以及兴办妇女扶贫项目等多种形式，先后帮助347万贫困妇女脱贫致富。

　　In the past year, led and encouraged by governments at all levels and organizations concerned, women in poor rural areas have taken an active part in the campaign of "learning culture and technology, and emulating each other in achievements and contributions." Numerous women have been taught to read and write, and some of them have undergone applied technology training and obtained the title of agrotechnician, and are now playing leading roles in developing productivity by reliance on science and technology in the poverty-stricken areas. The biggest women's organization in China, the All-China Women's Federation, has helped 3.47 million impoverished women out of poverty and get rich by providing poverty alleviation services, conducting cultural and technological training, facilitating small-amount credit loans, organizing labor service transfer and mutual help, and initiating poverty alleviation projects specially for women.

　　国家广泛动员社会力量，关注贫困妇女，支持各种帮助贫困地区妇女的社会救济活动。如救助贫困母亲的“幸福工程”、专门资助贫困地区失学女童的“春蕾计划”、援助西部缺水地区妇女的“母亲水窖工程”等，为加快农村妇女脱困发挥了积极作用。截止到2000年5月，“幸福工程”已投入资金1.45亿元，救助107472人，受惠人口达48.3万人。到2000年7月，“春蕾计划”共集资3.3亿元，使105万失学女童重返学校。

　　The state has mobilized all non-governmental sectors to show concern for impoverished women and support social relief activities for women in poverty-stricken areas. Such activities as the Happiness Project to help impoverished mothers, the Spring Buds Program for supporting girl dropouts in poverty-stricken areas and the Cistern Project to aid women in the water-deficient areas of western China, have played an active role in helping rural women to erase poverty quickly. By May 2000, some 145 million yuan had been put into the Happiness Project, helping 107,472 people and indirectly benefiting 483,000 people. By July 2000, the Spring Buds Program had raised 330 million yuan to help 1.05 million girl dropouts return to school.

二十一世纪初的农村扶贫开发 

　　  The Aid-the-Rural-Poor Program in the Early Period of the 21st Century

　　缓解和消除贫困仍然是中国今后一项长期的历史任务。为加快解决在一定程度和特定地区仍然存在的贫困问题，中国于2001年5月召开中央扶贫开发工作会议，对二十一世纪前十年中国的农村扶贫开发工作进行了全面部署。这次会议后，中国政府正式颁布《中国农村扶贫开发纲要（2001-2010年）》，提出了今后十年中国农村扶贫开发的目标任务、指导思想和方针政策。《中国农村扶贫开发纲要》是继《国家八七扶贫攻坚计划》之后，又一个指导中国农村扶贫开发工作的纲领性文件。

　　Alleviating and eliminating poverty remains a long-term historical task for China. In order to quicken the pace of solving the problem of poverty, which remains unsolved to a certain degree in certain areas, a meeting on this issue was held in May 2001 by the Central Government. An overall plan for aiding the poor in rural areas in the first ten years of the 21st century was worked out. After the meeting, the Chinese Government officially issued the Outline for Poverty Alleviation and Development of China's Rural Areas (2001-2010), setting out the objectives, tasks, guiding ideology, and policies and principles for work in this regard in the coming ten years. The Outline is another programmatic document following the Seven-Year Priority Poverty Alleviation Program for guiding the poverty alleviation work in the rural areas.

　　二十一世纪初中国的农村扶贫开发，既面临难得的历史机遇，也面临严峻挑战和尖锐问题。

　　The development-oriented poverty alleviation drive in rural China early in the 21st century is a rare historical opportunity, but it still faces serious challenges and problems.

　　有利条件

　　Favorable Conditions

　　二十一世纪初中国的扶贫开发存在着许多有利条件，而且一些条件较之过去更为有利。中国各级政府高度重视，社会各界大力支持，贫困地区广大干部群众团结奋斗，这是保障扶贫开发不断取得新成就的最重要的条件。就客观环境而言，有以下有利因素：

　　China today is blessed with many favorable conditions, some of them much more favorable than in the past, in its poverty alleviation drive. Great attention has been paid to the work by governments at various levels; support has been given by all sectors of society; and the cadres and ordinary people of the poor regions are working hard with one heart and one mind. These are the most important conditions for guaranteeing the steady progress of the work. With regard to the objective environment, we have the following favorable conditions:

　　扶贫开发已有一个较好的基础。经过20多年的努力，中国的贫困人口已基本解决了温饱问题，贫困地区的生产生活条件已经有了较大幅度的改善，抵御自然灾害的能力明显增强，具有了一定的发展能力；在过去扶贫开发的实践中，已创造和积累了很多成功经验，并探索出了一些行之有效的做法。这些都有助于使今后的扶贫开发迈上新的台阶。

　　A sound base has been laid for the poverty alleviation work. After more than 20 years of hard work, the problem of food and clothing of the impoverished population has been basically solved; production and living conditions in poverty-stricken areas have improved by a wide margin; the ability to withstand natural calamities and develop production in those areas has been strengthened; and we have accumulated a rich store of successful experiences and found out a number of effective methods in the practice of the poverty relief work. All these are helpful to the progress of our future work in this regard.

　　未来经济的持续增长将加快扶贫开发的进程。实践证明，经济增长是解决贫困问题的关键。根据测算，二十世纪九十年代中国贫困人口减少与经济增长的弹性系数为－0.8，即GDP每增长一个百分点，农村贫困人口可减少0.8%。根据国家经济发展计划，今后五年，中国经济预计年增长7%。经济的稳步增长将扩大劳动力需求，有利于贫困地区劳动力的就业，从而改善人民的生活水平。同时，随着综合国力的不断增强，国家可以投入更多的力量促进贫困地区开发建设，为贫困地区发展提供坚实的物质基础。

    The sustained growth of the economy in the future will quicken the process of the work of poverty alleviation. Practice has proved that economic growth is the key to solving the problem of poverty. The coefficient of elasticity of the reduction of China's poverty-stricken population and economic growth was -0.8 in the 1990s. That means that the increase of one percentage point of the GDP will reduce the size of the rural poor by 0.8 percent. In accordance with the state's economic development plan, China's economy will score an annual increase of seven percent in the coming five years. So there will be a further demand for workers, some of whom will come from the poor areas. As a result, the standard of living in those areas will be improved. At the same time, along with the steady improvement of the comprehensive national strength, the state will pour more resources into development and construction in the poor areas, providing a sound material base for the development of those areas.

　　经济结构调整有助于贫困地区的发展。在国内外市场竞争日趋激烈的情况下，中国正在大力调整和优化产业结构。发达地区一方面加快产业升级，大力发展资本技术密集型产业，另一方面，为了提高产业竞争力，还将一些劳动密集型产业项目向欠发达地区转移。中国的贫困地区大多地处中西部，资源相对丰富，劳动力成本低，具有承接这种结构梯度转移的区位优势。西部地区完全有可能引进资本和技术，接受外来产业转移，提高贫困地区在区域产业分工中的地位，从而加快本地区的产业结构转换和经济发展。

　　The economic restructuring is conducive to the development of the poor areas. At this time when there has been an increasingly fierce competition in both domestic and foreign markets, China is devoting major efforts to adjusting and optimizing its industrial structure. The developed regions, on the one hand, have quickened the pace of upgrading their industries and energetically developing capital- and technology-intensive industries. On the other hand, in order to improve the competitiveness of their industries, they are transferring some labor-intensive industries to the less-developed areas. The poor areas, mostly situated in the central and western parts of China, have relatively rich resources and cheap labor, which place them in a locationally advantageous position to respond to such transference. It is fully possible for the western region to import capital and technology, and accept transferred industries, so as to improve their position in the division of regional industries and quicken the change of local industrial structure and economic development.

　　西部大开发战略的实施有利于扶贫。中国正在实施的西部大开发战略，对进一步降低贫困发生率将产生深远的影响。西部大开发的重点是进一步加快基础设施建设，特别是加强水利、交通、通讯等基础设施建设，切实加强生态环境保护和建设。“十五”计划期间（2001-2005年），将有一大批工程在西部开工建设。此外，国家还制定了增加西部地区利用外资的比例、增发特别国债主要用于西部开发等许多有利于西部发展的优惠政策。一系列大工程的建设和优惠政策的实施，将为改变西部贫困地区的落后面貌打好基础。

　　The implementation of the large-scale development strategy for the western region is also helpful for poverty alleviation and will have a far-reaching influence on the reduction of the impoverishment rate. The focus of the development strategy is on quickening the construction of infrastructure, especially the building of water conservancy, transportation and telecommunications facilities, and the strengthening of eco- environmental protection and construction. During the Tenth Five-Year Plan period (2001-2005), a large number of projects will be undertaken in the western region. In addition, many preferential policies for the development of the western region have been formulated by the state, such as the increase of the percentage of foreign capital to be used by the western region and special state bonds issued mainly for the development of this region. The construction of a sequence of major projects and the implementation of the preferential policies will lay a good foundation for eliminating the backwardness of the poor areas in the western region.

　　对外开放的进一步扩大将为贫困地区带来新的发展机遇。中国加入世界贸易组织后，贫困地区的市场将会进一步扩大和开放，有利于这些地区发展有优势的劳动和资源密集型产业，增加劳动力就业。尽管加入世界贸易组织可能使贫困地区现有产业受到冲击，但从长远看，有利于贫困地区劳动力转移和劳动密集型产品的出口。

　　Opening wider to the outside world will bring new opportunities for the development of the poor areas. After China joins the WTO, the markets of these areas will expand further and open wider to the outside world, which will be favorable for the development of their advantageous labor- and resource- intensive industries, bringing more employment opportunities. Though the existing industries in those areas may be adversely affected after China enters the WTO, in the long run this will be good for the transfer of their workers and the export of their labor-intensive products.

　　难点与问题

　　Difficulties and Problems

　　二十一世纪初中国扶贫开发面临的难点和比较突出的问题是：第一，虽然贫困人口的收入水平明显提高，但目前中国扶贫的标准是低水平的。第二，由于受自然条件恶劣、社会保障系统薄弱和自身综合能力差等因素的掣肘，目前已经解决温饱问题的贫困人口还存在很大的脆弱性，容易重新返回到贫困状态。第三，尽管扶贫开发已使广大农村贫困地区的贫穷落后状况明显改变，但贫困农户的基本生产生活条件还没有质的变化，贫困地区社会、经济、文化落后的状况还没有根本改观。第四，由于中国人口基数很大，在今后相当长的一个时期将面临就业压力，这必然会影响到贫困人口的就业，使很多本来能够奏效的扶贫措施难以发挥出应有的作用。第五，尚未解决温饱的贫困人口一般都生活在自然条件恶劣、社会发展程度低和社会服务水平差的地区，这些地区投入与产出效益的反差较大。

　　The main difficulties and problems for China in the early period of the 21st century in the field of poverty alleviation are as follows: First, though the income of the poverty-stricken people has been obviously improved, the current standard for poverty relief in China is very low. Second, restricted by unfavorable natural conditions, weak social insurance system and their own poor comprehensive ability, the people who now have enough to eat and wear may easily sink back into poverty. Third, although the development-oriented poverty reduction drive has greatly changed the poverty and backwardness of the vast impoverished rural areas, there has been no qualitative change either in the basic production and living conditions of the poverty-stricken peasant households, or in the social, economic and cultural backwardness in those areas. Fourth, because of its large population, China will face employment pressure for a long period to come. This pressure is bound to adversely affect the employment of the impoverished population, so much so that many effective aid-the-poor measures will not play the roles they should play. Fifth, people who still do not have enough to eat and wear generally live in areas with adverse natural environments, a low level of social development and under- developed social services, where the contrast between input and result is very sharp.

对象和目标

　　Targets and Goals

　　中国政府将坚持把贫困地区尚未解决温饱问题的贫困人口作为扶贫开发的首要对象。这些贫困人口虽然数量不多，但解决的难度很大。同时，还要帮助初步解决温饱问题的贫困人口实现稳定脱贫。由于生产生活条件尚未根本改变，抗御自然灾害的能力不强，一遇自然灾害，这部分人极易返贫。要在实现稳定脱贫的基础上，进一步推动这部分人发展，走向富裕。

　　The Chinese Government will persist in taking those in impoverished areas who do not have enough to eat and wear as the first to be helped. Though their number is not large, there are a lot of difficulties in helping them get rid of poverty. At the same time, those who have just enough to eat and wear should be helped steadily to shake off poverty. Because their production and living conditions have not basically changed and they are not strong enough to fight natural calamities by themselves, these people will easily sink back into poverty once struck by natural disasters. So our future task is to further help those people become rich after they have shaken off poverty.

　　2001年至2010年中国扶贫开发的总体目标是：尽快解决极少数贫困人口温饱问题，进一步改善贫困地区的基本生产生活条件，巩固温饱成果，提高贫困人口的生活质量和综合素质，加强贫困乡村的基础设施建设，改善生态环境，逐步改变贫困地区社会、经济、文化的落后状况，为达到小康水平创造条件。

　　China's overall poverty alleviation goal from 2001 to 2010 is as follows: To help the small number of needy people without enough to eat and wear attain that minimum standard of living as soon as possible, and further improve the basic production and living conditions of the poor areas and consolidate the results gained in this regard. At the same time, the quality of life and comprehensive quality of the poverty-stricken people shall be improved, and construction of infrastructure facilities shall be speeded up in impoverished rural areas. In addition, their eco-environment will be improved, and their social, economic and cultural backwardness changed, so as to create the conditions for a future comfortable life.

　　中国政府将按照集中连片的原则，把贫困人口集中的中西部少数民族地区、革命老区、边疆地区和特困地区作为2001年至2010年扶贫开发的重点，并确定扶贫开发工作重点县，集中财力、物力和人力，实行统筹规划，分年实施，分类指导，综合治理。

　　From 2001 to 2010, the Chinese Government will concentrate its poverty alleviation efforts on the ethnic minority areas, old revolutionary base areas, border areas and destitute areas in the central and western regions. Some counties will be designated for special help. The government will use its financial, material and human resources in a concentrated way in the comparatively concentrated poor areas. A unified plan will be drawn up, which will be carried out on a yearly basis. The government will combine separate guidance with a comprehensive approach in the work.

　　措施和途径

　　Ways and Means

　　2001年至2010年中国农村扶贫开发的任务，将主要通过如下措施和途径实现：

　　The Chinese Government will adopt the following ways and means in its poverty alleviation work up to 2010:

　　继续重点支持发展种养业。集中力量帮助贫困群众发展有特色、有市场的种养业项目。以增加贫困人口的收入为中心，依靠科技进步，着力优化品种、提高质量、增加效益。以有利于改善生态环境为原则，加强生态环境的保护和建设，实现可持续发展。以市场为导向，选准产品和项目，搞好信息、技术、销售服务，确保增产增收。

　　Continuing to put the stress on crop cultivation and aquiculture and poultry raising, and efforts will be concentrated on helping the poor people to develop specialty and competitive products in this field. With increasing the income of the poverty-stricken people as the focal point, we shall optimize the varieties of products, improve their qualities and increase their benefits by reliance on sci-tech progress. In line with the principle of improving the eco-environment, the protection and construction of the ecological environment will be strengthened so as to achieve sustainable development. With the market as the orientation, comprehensive investigation should be done concerning products that are going to be put into production. Services in the fields of information, technology and sales should be guaranteed in order to ensure the increase of production and incomes.

　　积极推进农业产业化经营。按照产业化发展方向和要求，对具有资源优势和市场需求的农产品生产，进行连片规划建设，形成有特色的区域性主导产业。积极发展“公司加农户”和订单农业。引导和鼓励具有市场开拓能力的大中型农产品加工企业到贫困地区建立原料生产基地，为贫困农户提供产前、产中、产后系列化服务，形成贸工农一体化、产供销一条龙的产业化经营。

　　Promoting the industrialized operation of agriculture. In line with the requirements for industrialized operation, farm products with resources advantages and marketability should be produced or planned and developed according to an integrated plan, so as to develop a characteristic, regionally leading industry. Great efforts will be made to develop "cooperation between farmers and companies" and a made-to-order farming. Large and medium-sized agricultural products processing enterprises capable of developing new markets should be guided or encouraged to build raw material production bases in the poor areas and provide serialized, pre-production, in-production and post-production services for impoverished peasant households, so as to form an industrialized operation featuring the integration of trade, industry and agriculture and the coordinated management of production, supply and sale.

　　增加财政扶贫资金和扶贫贷款。国家将进一步扩大以工代赈规模，根据贫困地区财政困难的实际情况，加大财政转移支付力度，并对财政扶贫资金实行专户管理。增加扶贫贷款，支持能够带动贫困人口增加收入的种养业、劳动密集型企业、农产品加工企业、市场流通企业的发展，以及基础设施建设项目，并积极稳妥地推广扶贫到户的小额信贷，支持贫困农户发展生产。

　　Increasing budgetary funds and loans for poverty alleviation. The state will further increase the scale of work-relief projects and, in line with the practical financial difficulties of the poor areas, strengthen financial transfer payments and implement the control of budgetary poverty relief funds with the household as the basic unit. The increased relief loans shall be used for developing crop cultivation, aquiculture, poultry raising, labor-intensive enterprises, farm produce processing enterprises, market circulation enterprises and infrastructure construction, which will help raise the incomes of the poverty-stricken people. Small-amount credit loans will be extended in an active and steady manner to help needy peasant households develop their production.

　　改善贫困地区的基本生产生活条件。以贫困乡、村为单位，加强基本农田、基础设施、环境改造和公共服务设施建设。到2010年，在国家重点扶持的贫困区域内，基本解决人畜饮水困难，力争做到绝大多数行政村通电、通路、通邮、通电话、通广播电视；做到大多数贫困乡有卫生院、贫困村有卫生室，基本控制影响贫困地区群众生活生产的主要地方病。

　　Improving the basic production and living conditions of the poor areas. Construction of basic farmland, infrastructure, environmental improvement projects and public service facilities will be strengthened with the township or village as the basic unit. By 2010, the drinking water problem for both people and livestock will be basically solved in the key state-helped poor areas, and at the same time efforts will be made to provide most of the administrative villages with electricity, road access, and postal, telephone, radio and TV links. In addition, hospitals will be built in most of the poor townships, and clinics in most of the poor villages, so as to basically control the main endemic diseases seriously affecting the life and production of those areas.

　　提高贫困地区群众的科技文化素质。实行农科教结合，普通教育、职业教育、成人教育统筹，有针对性地通过各类职业技术学校和各种不同类型的短期培训，增强农民掌握先进实用技术的能力。确保在贫困地区实现九年义务教育，进一步提高适龄儿童入学率。移风易俗，倡导科学文明的生活方式。

Improving the sci-tech and cultural qualities of the masses in the poor areas. In order to help the peasants acquire advanced and practical techniques, it is necessary to integrate agriculture, science and education, make overall plans for general, vocational and adult education, and run vocational and technical schools and short-term training classes with clear aims in mind. The nine-year compulsory education will be guaranteed in the poor areas, and the attendance rate of school-age children will be further raised. The old backward habits and customs will be changed, and a scientific and civilized life-style will be promoted in those areas.

　　鼓励多种所有制经济组织参与扶贫开发。中国政府将创造良好的政策环境和投资环境，吸引多种所有制经济组织参与贫困地区的经济发展。对于适应市场需要，能够提高产业层次、带动千家万户增加收入的农产品加工企业，能够发挥贫困地区资源优势并改善生态环境的资源开发型企业，能够安排贫困地区剩余劳动力就业的劳动密集型企业，能够帮助贫困群众解决市场流通问题的企业，国家都给予必要的支持。

Encouraging economic organizations with diverse forms of ownership to assist with the development of the poor areas. The Chinese Government will create a better policy and investment environment to attract economic organizations with diverse forms of ownership to help the economic development of the poor areas. Necessary support will be given by the state to agricultural products processing enterprises that meet the demands of the market and can upgrade their industries and help increase the incomes of thousand and one households; resource-exploitation enterprises that will give full play to the resource advantages of the poor areas and improve their eco-environment; labor-intensive enterprises that can provide employment for the surplus labor force in the poor areas; and enterprises that can help the poor and needy solve the problem of market circulation.

　　注重动员全社会帮助贫困地区的开发建设。除了政府动用资源进行扶贫外，国家将进一步动员社会各界参与扶贫，增加社会扶贫的资源。根据扶贫开发规划，继续做好东部沿海发达地区对口帮扶西部贫困地区的东西扶贫协作工作，进一步扩大协作规模，增强帮扶力度。鼓励和引导各种层次、不同形式的民间交流与合作，特别是企业间的相互合作和共同发展。发挥社会各界在扶贫开发中的重要作用，并积极创造条件，引导非政府组织参与和执行政府扶贫开发项目。

Mobilizing the whole of society to assist with the development of the poor areas. To enlist greater social involvement in this sphere of endeavor, the state will mobilize society at large to take part in the poverty alleviation drive, in addition to the resources provided by the government. In accordance with the development-oriented poverty reduction program, further efforts will be made to promote counterpart cooperation between the eastern developed coastal region and the poverty-stricken western region, enlarge the scale of the cooperation and increase the momentum of the relief work. It is necessary to encourage and guide non-governmental exchange and cooperation at different levels and in diverse forms, especially cooperation for common development between enterprises. It is also necessary to give play to the important role of all social sectors in the development-oriented poverty reduction efforts and actively create conditions for non-governmental organizations to take part in or implement the government development projects in the poor areas.

　　推动扶贫开发领域的国际交流与合作。继续争取国际组织和发达国家向中国提供援助性扶贫项目。为保证这类项目的顺利执行，国家将适当增加相应配套资金比例，对地方财政确有困难的可以全额配套。根据贫困地区的特点，采取有针对性的措施，加强对国外援助性扶贫项目的管理。努力提高国外援贷款项目的经济效益，增强还贷能力。加强与国际组织在扶贫开发领域里的交流，借鉴国际社会在扶贫开发方面创造的成功经验和行之有效的方式、方法，进一步提高中国扶贫开发的工作水平和整体效益。

Promoting international exchange and cooperation in development-oriented poverty relief. We shall continue our efforts to win aid projects from international organizations and developed countries. In order to guarantee the smooth carrying out of these projects, the state will increase the proportion of corresponding supportive funds appropriately, or provide full-amount supportive funds if the local budget is tight. In view of the local characteristics of the poor areas, measures should be adopted to strengthen the management of foreign-aid projects. It is necessary to work hard to improve the economic returns from foreign-loan and other foreign-aid projects, and improve our capability to repay the loans. It is also necessary to strengthen exchanges with international organizations in development- oriented poverty relief, and learn from the successful experience and effective measures introduced by the international community in this sphere of endeavor, so as to improve our poverty relief work and its overall benefits.

　　推进扶贫开发的规范化建设。切实落实扶贫工作责任制，坚持省负总责，县抓落实，工作到村，扶贫到户。加强贫困地区的干部队伍建设和基层民主政权建设，不断提高基层干部和基层组织带领群众脱贫致富的能力。加强扶贫资金的审计和扶贫开发统计监测工作，形成制度，长期坚持。稳定扶贫开发工作机构，增强扶贫开发的组织领导和协调管理能力。随着贫困地区扶贫开发的不断深入，中国的扶贫开发工作将进一步制度化、规范化，逐步纳入法制轨道。

Standardizing the work of development-oriented poverty alleviation. The responsibility system has to be carried out earnestly in this sphere of work. The provinces shall assume overall responsibility, while the counties shall formulate concrete measures for implementation in the villages and ensure that the individual households benefit from the work. Cadre training and the building of the democratic political power at the grassroots level in the poverty-stricken areas shall be strengthened, so as to enhance the capabilities of the cadres and organizations at the grassroots level in leading the people to get rid of poverty and become well-off. The auditing of the poverty relief funds and the relief-related statistical and supervisory work should be strengthened and become a regular practice that should be persevered in for a long period in the future. Poverty relief organs should be stable, and their leading ability and ability of coordinated management in the poverty relief work should be raised. With its steady deepening, the work for development- oriented assistance to the poverty-stricken areas should be standardized and institutionalized and gradually put into the orbit of the legal system.

　　中国是一个发展中国家，消除贫困任重道远。基本解决农村贫困人口的温饱问题只是完成这一历史任务的阶段性成果。在此基础上使贫困地区的人民生活实现小康，进而过上比较宽裕的生活，需要一个长期的奋斗过程。随着中国改革开放和现代化建设事业的发展，随着中国综合国力的不断增强，中国的农村扶贫开发必将取得新的成绩。

　　China is a developing country, and it has a long way to go to shake off poverty. The basic solution of the problem of food and clothing of the poverty-stricken population in rural areas is only the result of one phase in our effort to accomplish this historic task. Subsequently, it will still take a long period of hard work to enable the people in the poor areas to first live a comfortable life and then a well-off life. With the progress of the reform and opening-up and the modernization drive and the steady increase of China's comprehensive national strength, our development- oriented poverty reduction program for the rural areas is bound to be crowned with new success. 　　
中国的劳动和社会保障状况
Labor and Social Security in China
国务院新闻办公室
Information Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China 
二○○二年四月，北京 
April 2002, Beijing
目录
Contents
前言
Foreword
就业形势总体保持稳定
Overall Stability in Employment Situation
新型劳动关系基本形成
 Formation of New Labor Relations
社会保障体系初步建立
 The Establishment of a Social Security System
二十一世纪初期的发展
 Development in the Early Period of the 21st Century

前　言
Foreword
劳动和社会保障权利是公民的基本权利，关系广大公民的切身利益。中国是世界上最大的发展中国家，人口众多，经济发展水平不高，发展劳动和社会保障事业的任务十分艰巨。
The right to work and enjoy social security is a fundamental right of citizens, having a direct bearing on their vital interests. As the most populous and largest developing country in the world with a relatively low level of economic development, China is faced with an onerous task of promoting its work in this regard.
中国政府从本国国情出发，依据《中华人民共和国宪法》和《中华人民共和国劳动法》，保障公民的劳动和社会保障权利，努力提高劳动和社会保障管理服务水平，取得了巨大成就。
Proceeding from China's actual conditions, and in accordance with the Constitution of the People's Republic of China and the Labor Law of the People's Republic of China, the Chinese government has made remarkable achievements in ensuring its citizens' right to work and enjoy social security, and in improving labor and social security management and services.
中华人民共和国成立初期，中国政府采取一系列有效措施，解决了旧中国遗留下来的严重失业问题，保障了人民的基本生活。在计划经济体制下，中国实行高度集中统一的就业、工资和劳动保险制度，对统筹安排当时的就业、保障职工生活、促进经济建设和社会安定发挥了积极作用。但随着历史的发展，旧的劳动和社会保障体制已不能适应经济和社会发展的要求。
Immediately after the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the Chinese government took a series of effective measures, successfully solving the serious problem of unemployment left over by the old China and ensuring the people's basic livelihood. Under the planned-economy system, China adopted highly concentrated employment, wage and labor insurance systems, which played a positive role in making comprehensive arrangements for employment, guaranteeing the livelihood of employees, and promoting economic construction and social stability at that time. However, with the progress of history, the old labor and social security system had become unadaptable to the requirements of economic and social development.
1978年以来，中国坚持以经济建设为中心，实行改革开放政策，逐步走上建立社会主义市场经济体制的道路，劳动和社会保障事业发展迅速。中国政府合理调整就业结构，努力促进就业总量的增加，建立市场导向的就业机制，保持了就业形势的基本稳定；致力于维护和谐稳定的劳动关系，改革工资收入分配制度，逐步完善劳动标准体系，使新型劳动关系基本形成；改革和完善社会保障制度，使社会保险制度覆盖了大多数城镇从业人员和退休人员，并在城市普遍建立了居民最低生活保障制度，在农村也积极推进社会保障制度建设。经过多年的探索和努力，与社会主义市场经济体制相适应的劳动和社会保障制度已初步建立。
Since 1978, China has adhered to the policy of reform and opening-up, with the focus on economic construction, and has gradually stepped onto the road of establishing a socialist market economy system. As a result, labor and social security undertakings have developed rapidly. By rationally readjusting the employment structure, increasing overall employment and setting up a market-oriented employment mechanism, the Chinese government has brought about a basically stable situation in employment. By maintaining harmonious and stable labor relations and reforming the wage and income distribution system, the government has improved the labor standards system step by step, and helped to basically establish a new type of labor relations. The reform and improvement of the social security system has enabled the social insurance system to cover the vast majority of employees and retirees in urban areas. The system for ensuring a minimum standard of living for residents has been set up in cities, and the building of a social security system is being vigorously promoted in rural areas. After years of trial and effort, a labor and social security system corresponding to the socialist market economy system is now basically in place.
中国政府根据相互尊重、平等互利的原则，积极参加国际劳工事务。在劳动和社会保障领域，中国与国际劳工组织、联合国开发计划署、世界银行、亚洲开发银行等众多国际机构以及许多国家进行了卓有成效的交流与合作，为促进就业、消除贫困和维护劳动者合法权益发挥了积极作用。
Based on the principles of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit, the Chinese government actively participates in international labor affairs. In the field of labor and social security, China has conducted fruitful exchanges and cooperation with many countries and international organizations, such as the International Labor Organization, United Nations Development Program, World Bank and Asian Development Bank. It has played a positive role in the international community in promoting employment, eliminating poverty and protecting the legal rights and interests of workers.
进入二十一世纪，中国开始了全面建设小康社会、加快推进现代化的新的发展阶段。积极促进就业、维护职工权益、协调劳动关系、增加居民收入、完善社会保障，是新世纪之初中国劳动和社会保障事业的主要奋斗目标。
Entering the 21st century, China has embarked on a new development stage, the stage of starting the full-scale construction of a comparatively well-off society and accelerating modernization. The major goals of China's labor and social security efforts at the beginning of the new century are promoting employment, protecting employees' rights and interests, coordinating labor relations, raising people's incomes and improving social security.
    
就业形势总体保持稳定
    Overall Stability in Employment Situation
由于人口众多、劳动力资源丰富和经济结构调整等原因，中国面临巨大的就业压力。中国政府始终将促进就业作为国民经济和社会发展的战略性任务，将控制失业率列入国民经济宏观调控的主要目标，合理调整就业结构，建立市场导向的就业机制，大力促进就业总量的增加，总体上保持了就业形势的基本稳定。到2001年底，全国人口总数为127627万人(不含香港、澳门特别行政区和台湾省)，从业人员为73025万人，劳动力参与率为77.03%；城镇从业人员占从业人员总数的32.8%，乡村从业人员占从业人员总数的67.2%；城镇登记失业率为3.6%。
Employment presents a great pressure on China due to its huge population, abundant labor resources and economic restructuring. The Chinese government regards increasing employment opportunities as a major strategic task in economic and social development, and controlling the rate of unemployment as a main target in macro-economic regulation and control. It has rationally readjusted the employment structure, established a market-oriented employment mechanism, put great efforts into increasing overall employment and maintained basic stability in the general employment situation. By the end of 2001, the country's population had reached 1.27627 billion (excluding the populations of the Hong Kong and Macao special administrative regions and Taiwan Province), and 730.25 million people were employed, accounting for 77.03 percent of the total labor force. Employees in urban areas accounted for 32.8 percent of the total, and those in rural areas for 67.2 percent. The unemployment rate on record in urban areas was 3.6 percent.
    
实施积极促进就业的政策
    Implementing the Policy of Vigorously Increasing Employment
中国政府坚持以经济建设为中心，通过经济增长带动就业增长，实行积极的就业政策，采取各种有效措施，大力促进就业。
Focusing on economic construction, the Chinese government promotes employment through economic growth, carries out an active policy of employment, and adopts various effective measures to increase the rate of employment.
合理调整就业结构。适应产业结构的调整，引导有利于增加就业机会的产业和企业的发展。在增加基本建设投资，积极扩大内需，保持国民经济快速发展的同时，通过产业政策的调整，重视发展具有比较优势和市场潜力的劳动密集型企业，特别是就业容量比较大的服务性企业和中小企业。积极发展集体、私营、个体等多种所有制经济，实行灵活多样的就业形式，增加就业岗位，拓宽就业渠道。
Rationally readjusting the employment structure. In line with the readjustment of the industrial structure, the government guides the development of industries and enterprises capable of offering more job opportunities. While increasing capital construction investment, vigorously expanding the domestic demand and maintaining the high-speed development of the national economy, the government stresses the development of labor-intensive enterprises with comparative advantages and market potential, especially service enterprises and small and medium-sized enterprises capable of offering employment to a large number of people, through readjustment of its industrial policies. It also increases employment and expands employment channels by vigorously developing the economy with diverse forms of ownership, such as collective, private and individual ownerships, and by encouraging various forms of employment.

建立市场导向的就业机制。中国政府实行“劳动者自主就业、市场调节就业、政府促进就业”的就业方针，鼓励劳动者通过公平竞争获得就业岗位，支持用人单位自主决定用人的数量和质量，并采取各种措施促进市场导向就业机制的形成。劳动力市场信息网络已开始发挥作用，促进了劳动力供求信息的交流，帮助劳动者通过劳动力市场实现就业和再就业。为建立机制健全、运行规范、服务周到、监督有力的劳动力市场，中国政府在100个城市进行了劳动力市场科学化、规范化和现代化建设试点。近年来，中国政府开始探索建立劳动力市场价格形成机制，发挥市场机制在劳动力资源配置、工资形成和劳动力流动中的基础性调节作用。

Establishing a market-oriented employment mechanism. Carrying out the employment policy of "laborers finding employment on their own initiative, the market adjusting the demand for employment and the government promoting employment," the Chinese government encourages securing employment through fair competition, encourages employers to decide the number and quality of their own employees, and adopts measures to promote the shaping of a market-oriented employment mechanism. In the meantime, the labor market information network has started to display its worth, promoting exchanges of information concerning labor supply and demand, and helping the jobless find employment or reemployment through the labor market. In order to set up a labor market with a sound mechanism, standardized operation and good service, and under effective supervision, the Chinese government has conducted trials to set up a scientific, standardized and modernized labor market in 100 cities. In recent years, the Chinese government has started to trial-implement a pricing mechanism for the labor market, in order to enable the market mechanism to play its basic regulatory role in the allocation of labor resources, wage formation and labor flow.

提高劳动者素质。为提高劳动者文化素质和职业技能，中国政府通过多种途径，积极发展各类教育事业，实行学历证书和职业资格证书并重的制度。目前，普及九年义务教育人口覆盖率达到85%，青年壮年文盲率下降到5%；有普通高等学校1225所，在校学生719万人；成人高等学校686所，在校生456万人；普通中等学校80400所，在校生7919万人。国家还通过发展高等职业技术学校、中等职业技术学校、中等专业技术学校、技术工人学校、就业训练中心、民办职业培训机构、企业职工培训中心等职业培训形式，努力形成全方位、多层次的职业技术教育和培训体系，加强对新生劳动力、在职职工及下岗失业人员的培训。针对未能升学的初高中毕业生等新生劳动力，全面实行一至三年劳动预备制培训；对技工学校、就业训练中心进行调整和重组，建立综合性培训基地；推动“市场引导培训、培训促进就业”机制的形成；全面推行职业资格证书制度，并建立了从初级工到高级技师的职业资格体系。目前中国城镇80%以上的新就业人员达到高中水平以上或者经过职业技能培训，已有近3500万人取得了相应的职业资格证书。

Enhancing workers' quality. In order to raise the cultural level and professional skill of the work force, the Chinese government has striven to promote all forms of education through various channels, and laid equal stress on academic and vocational qualification credentials. At present, the system of nine-year compulsory education covers 85 percent of the total population, and the illiteracy rate among the young and middle-aged has dropped to 5 percent. There are currently 1,225 regular institutions of higher learning, with 7.19 million students; 686 adult institutions of higher learning, with 4.56 million students; and 80,400 regular middle schools, with 79.19 million students. China is aiming to establish an all-round, multi-level vocational and technical education and training system by developing higher vocational and technical schools, secondary vocational and technical schools, secondary polytechnic schools, technical schools, employment training centers, community-run vocational training institutions and enterprise-run on-the-job training centers, thereby strengthening the training of new workers, on-the-job employees and laid-off workers. Pre-job training courses of one to three years are offered to secondary-school graduates who have failed to gain higher education. Technical schools and employment training centers are being readjusted and restructured into comprehensive training bases. A mechanism by which "the market guides training, and training promotes employment" is being formed. The vocational qualification credentials system is being introduced, and a vocational qualification system has been set up covering workers at all levels, from basic workers to senior technicians. At present, in urban areas over 80 percent of newly employed people are graduates of senior high schools or above, or have received job skill training. Nearly 35 million people have obtained vocational qualification credentials.
发展就业服务体系。中国从二十世纪八十年代开始，建立并不断完善包含职业介绍、就业训练、失业保险和劳动就业服务企业等内容的就业服务体系。通过就业服务体系为劳动者求职和企业用人提供指导、咨询与介绍服务，对初次求职者进行就业前训练，对失业人员进行转业训练，并提供失业保险，为就业弱势群体提供就业岗位。政府鼓励民办职业介绍机构的发展，推动就业服务向社区延伸，形成多层次的就业服务网络。
Developing the employment service system. Since the 1980s, China has set up and improved the employment service system, which includes employment agencies, employment training, unemployment insurance and employment service enterprises. The system offers guidance, consultancy and agency services to job seekers and employers, offers pre-job training and vocational training courses to seekers of employment and reemployment, and provides unemployment insurance. The system also offers job openings to those of the weak group in the employment field. In the meantime, the government encourages the formation of community-run employment agencies as a part of the multi-level employment service network.
统筹兼顾城乡就业。中国农村劳动力资源丰富，不充分就业问题严重。中国政府高度重视农村劳动力的就业问题，结合“城镇化”和“西部大开发”等战略的实施，努力探索城乡统筹就业的新途径，形成了两方面的基本政策。一是促进农村劳动力在当地就业。充分利用农村本地资源优势，积极调整农业和农村经济结构，发展效益农业和劳动密集型农业，发展农村非农产业，引导乡镇企业发展与小城镇建设相结合，扩大农村水利、交通运输、农村电网等基础设施建设规模，发展农村基础教育和职业技能培训。二是引导农村劳动力跨地区流动就业。农村改革的成功极大地提高了农业生产率，农业富余劳动力开始从农村流向城镇，从西部内地流向东部沿海地区。中国政府积极引导农村劳动力跨地区合理流动，通过加强信息网络建设和职业中介服务，开展农村劳动力输出前培训，组织农村劳动力有序流动，提高外出劳动力就业率，并建立农村劳动力外出就业和返乡创业双向流动就业机制。目前，已在全国100个县市建立了1000个农村劳动力流动就业监测点，分析农村劳动力的流动和需求状况，及时发布信息，引导农村劳动力合理流动。
Making overall plans for urban and rural employment. China has a serious problem of insufficient employment opportunities in rural areas, where there are abundant labor resources. Attaching great importance to the employment of the rural labor force, the Chinese government has explored new ways for comprehensive employment planning in urban and rural areas in line with the urbanization and western development strategies. Two basic policies have been worked out. The first is to encourage the rural labor force to find work locally. Making full use of the advantages of local resources in rural areas, the government will vigorously readjust the structure of agriculture and that of the rural economy; develop profitable and labor-intensive agriculture alongside non-agricultural industries in rural areas; guide township enterprises to develop in line with the construction of small cities and towns; enlarge the construction scales of infrastructure facilities such as water conservancy, communications and transportation, and electricity in the rural areas; and promote elementary education and vocational training in the rural areas. The second is to guide the rural labor force to find employment in other areas. As success in rural reform has greatly raised agricultural productivity, the surplus agricultural labor force has started to flow from rural to urban areas, and from western inland to eastern coastal areas. The Chinese government guides the flow of rural labor to different areas according to need, and, by strengthening information network building and employment agency services, offers pre-transfer training to rural workers and organizes an orderly flow of the rural labor force, so as to ensure the highest possible level of employment in this regard. The government has also established an employment mechanism for the two-way flow of rural workers, whereby to help the latter to find jobs in other areas or return to their native places to start businesses. At present, 1,000 rural labor flow and employment monitoring stations have been set up in 100 counties and cities around the country to analyze the flow of and demand for workers from the countryside and regularly release information, so as to guide the rational flow of migrant rural labor force.
    
就业规模扩大、结构优化
    Enlarging Employment Scale, Optimizing Employment Structure
经过政府和社会各方面的共同努力，中国的就业总量明显增加。1978年以来，城乡从业人员共增加了32873万人，其中城镇增加了14426万人。
Through the common efforts of the government and all sectors of society, total employment in China has grown remarkably. Since 1978, the number of employees in urban and rural areas has increased by 328.73 million, of which 144.26 million are urban employees.
　　就业结构发生很大变化。2000年，第一、二、三产业从业人员的就业结构比重分别为50%、22.5%和27.5%。与过去相比，第一产业就业比重明显下降，第二、三产业就业比重增长较大，特别是第三产业的就业比重增长速度高于第二产业的增长速度。国有和集体单位的从业人数占城镇从业人员的比重从1978年的99.8%下降到2001年的37.3%，私营企业、个体和外商投资企业的从业人员明显增加。在农村，农业就业虽仍以家庭为主，但随着城镇化战略的实施和非农产业的发展，非农就业和农村劳动力转移迅速发展。到2000年底，乡镇企业从业人员达12819.5万人，其中，乡镇集体企业从业人员3832.8万人，乡镇私营企业从业人员3252.5万人，乡镇个体企业从业人员5734.2万人。二十世纪九十年代以来农村转移到城镇就业的劳动力达8000多万人。
    The employment structure, too, has changed dramatically. In 2000, employees in the primary, secondary and tertiary industries accounted for 50 percent, 22.5 percent and 27.5 percent, respectively. In recent years, the employment percentage of the primary industry has dropped markedly, while the employment percentages of the secondary and tertiary industries have risen rapidly. Particularly, the growth rate of the employment percentage of the tertiary industry has been higher than that of the secondary industry. The employees of state and collective enterprises and institutions accounted for 37.3 percent of the total urban employees in 2001, down from 99.8 percent in 1978. Meanwhile, the number of employees of private, individually owned and foreign-invested enterprises has increased drastically. In the countryside, the household is still the dominant unit of agricultural employment. However, with the implementation of the urbanization strategy and the development of non-agricultural industries, non-agricultural employment and the transfer of rural labor have increased rapidly. By the end of 2000, the number of employees of township enterprises had reached 128.195 million, of which 38.328 million were employed by township collective enterprises, 32.525 million by township private enterprises and 57.342 million by individually owned township enterprises. Since the 1990s, the labor force transferred from rural to urban areas has topped the 80-million mark.
促进下岗职工和失业人员再就业
    Promoting Reemployment of the Laid-off and Unemployed
随着经济结构调整的加速，长期积累的企业经营机制等矛盾日益显露，出现了企业大量富余人员下岗的情况。国有企业下岗职工多为年龄相对较大、文化素质较低和职业技能单一的人员，实现再就业比较困难。为解决下岗职工和失业人员的问题，中国政府在保障他们基本生活的同时，制定了一系列再就业政策并采取了多方面措施。
With the speeding up of the economic restructuring, the long-accumulated contradictions in the operating mechanism of enterprises have become increasingly apparent, and large numbers of redundant employees in enterprises have been laid off. Most of the laid-offs from state-owned enterprises are relatively older, poorly educated and skilled in few jobs. Therefore, it is rather difficult for them to find reemployment. To settle the problem of the laid-off and unemployed personnel, the Chinese government, while guaranteeing their basic livelihood, has formulated a whole slue of policies, complete with a variety of measures, to ease the way for their reemployment.
采取积极主动的就业服务措施。在有下岗职工的国有企业普遍建立再就业服务中心，下岗职工进中心后，政府公共就业服务机构每半年为他们提供一次职业指导、三次就业信息和一次免费的职业培训机会。从1998年开始，政府实施第一期“三年千万”(三年内累计培训下岗职工和失业人员1000万人)再就业培训计划，通过动员社会培训力量，实行政府购买培训成果等有效措施，推动下岗职工和失业人员参加再就业培训。1998年至2000年的三年间，全国各地共组织了1300多万名下岗职工和失业人员参加培训，接受培训半年后的就业率达到60%。从2001年起，政府开始实施第二期“三年千万”再就业培训计划。目前已在30个城市实施了“创业培训”计划，对有志于开办小企业的下岗职工和失业人员进行创业培训，在培训结束后帮助他们进行工商登记、获得小额贷款，通过发展小企业以吸纳更多的下岗职工和失业人员再就业。
Adopting active employment service measures. Reemployment service centers have been established in all those state-owned enterprises that have laid-off workers and staff members. After they have registered with the centers, governmental public employment service organs will provide them once with occupational guidance, thrice with employment information and once with free job training, all on a six-month basis. Beginning in 1998, the government started to implement the first phase of the "ten million in three years" reemployment training program, which was aimed at training ten million laid-off jobless persons in the course of three years. By mobilizing all the training forces in society, employing the beneficiaries of training and other effective measures, the government has convinced laid-off and unemployed persons to participate in reemployment training. From 1998 to 2000, more than 13 million laid-off and unemployed persons nationwide had taken part in retraining, and the reemployment rate after six months of training had reached 60 percent. The government began to carry out the second phase of the reemployment training program in 2001. Moreover, a total of 30 cities so far have carried out a "starting a business" training program, offering training to laid-off and unemployed persons who wish to establish small businesses, helping them register with the industrial and commercial administration authorities and acquire small loans after the completion of training, thereby to increase their reemployment opportunities through the establishment of small businesses.
完善和落实再就业优惠政策。通过简化工商登记、安排场地、减免税费、提供信贷等措施，帮助下岗职工和失业人员举办生产自救型经济实体或劳动组织、自谋职业或组织起来就业。把社区就业作为下岗职工和失业人员再就业的主要方向，积极发展吸纳就业能力比较强的小企业和劳动就业服务企业。
Improving and implementing preferential reemployment policies. By simplifying the procedures of registration with industrial and commercial administration authorities, arranging business premises, reducing or waiving taxes and fees, and granting loans, the government helps laid-off and unemployed people set up economic entities or labor organizations to support themselves, seek reemployment or otherwise to find their own means of livelihood. Taking employment in community services as the main orientation of the reemployment efforts, the government has spared no pains to develop those small enterprises and employment service enterprises that can provide more employment opportunities.
开展“再就业援助行动”。为妥善解决下岗职工出中心后面临的实际困难，政府组织开展了“再就业援助行动”，通过各项援助措施，使下岗职工出中心后均能在基本生活保障、再就业和社会保险接续等方面得到及时有效的服务。
Unfolding the "Reemployment Assistance Action." To appropriately resolve the practical difficulties laid-off employees face after they leave reemployment service centers, the government has organized a "Reemployment Assistance Action" drive to extend prompt and effective service to guarantee their basic livelihood, reemployment and social insurance through various assistance measures.
1998年至2001年，中国国有企业下岗职工累计有2550多万人，其中1680多万人实现了再就业。
From 1998 to 2001, over 25.5 million people were laid off from state enterprises, of whom over 16.8 million have been reemployed.
    
保障妇女就业权利
    Guaranteeing Women's Right to Employment
　　妇女就业在中国得到特别关注。《中华人民共和国宪法》、《中华人民共和国劳动法》、《中华人民共和国妇女权益保障法》对保障妇女就业权利均有专门规定。国家保护妇女享有与男子平等的劳动权利，实行男女同工同酬，并保障妇女在经期、孕期、产期和哺乳期受到特殊保护。中国政府和社会各界积极开展妇女的职业技能培训，开发和拓展适合妇女就业的领域和行业，实行更加灵活的就业形式，为不同就业需求的妇女提供就业机会。
    Special concern has been given to the employment of women in China. The Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Labor Law of the People's Republic of China, and Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of the Rights and Interests of Women all contain special provisions on the protection of women's right to employment. The state protects the right of women to work on equal terms with men, applies the principle of equal pay for equal work to men and women alike, and gives special protection to women during the menstrual period, pregnancy, maternity and breastfeeding. The Chinese government and all sectors of society energetically conduct job skill training for women, develop and expand the fields and trades suitable for women to work in, and adopts more flexible forms of employment, so as to provide employment opportunities for women to meet their different requirements.
帮助残疾人等特殊群体就业
    Helping the Disabled and Other Special Groups to Find Work
残疾人参加社会劳动和就业的权利得到政府的高度重视。中国采取集中与分散相结合和鼓励自谋职业的方针促进残疾人就业。福利企业是集中安置残疾人就业的重要形式，政府通过给予税收减免等优惠政策，鼓励发展福利企业，以吸纳更多的残疾人就业。同时，还实行残疾人按比例就业的政策，所有用人单位都要按照一定比例安排残疾人就业，达不到比例的企业和单位要缴纳促进残疾人就业保障金。1996年至2000年的五年间，社会各方面利用政府拨款和残疾人就业保障金培训残疾人110多万人，安置就业110多万人，残疾人就业率由70%提高到80.7%。
The Chinese government attaches great importance to the rights of the disabled to social labor and employment. China adopts the principles of combining centralization and decentralization and encouraging seeking employment on one's own initiative to help the disabled find work. Welfare enterprises are an important form of centralized employment for the disabled. The government grants preferential policies, such as reducing and waiving taxation, to encourage the development of welfare enterprises, so as to increase employment for the disabled. Meanwhile, the government requires all enterprises and institutions to hire a certain proportion of disabled persons, and those which fail to do so must pay a certain amount of money to the employment guarantee fund for the disabled. In the five years of 1996-2000, more than 1.1 million disabled persons were given skill training, and another 1.1 million found jobs, on the strength of government allocations and the employment guarantee fund for the disabled, and the employment rate of the disabled jumped from 70 percent to 80.7 percent.
　　针对城市贫困无业人员、大龄下岗职工及失业人员的就业困难，政府建立就业服务制度，通过出资扶植社区公益性就业组织，开展环境保洁、社区保安、社区服务等项目，安置特困人员就业，以及组织开展免费就业服务，取得了较好的效果。
    In addition, the government has established an employment service system for badly-off jobless urban residents, and for older laid-off and unemployed persons. It seeks to arrange jobs for destitute persons by providing funds to support community welfare-type employment organizations, developing community environmental protection, hygiene, security and other services, and providing free employment services. All these measures have achieved the desired effects.
新型劳动关系基本形成
     Formation of New Labor Relations
在建立和完善社会主义市场经济体制过程中，中国的劳动关系日趋复杂多样。中国致力于维护和谐稳定的劳动关系，初步形成了以《中华人民共和国劳动法》为主体的调整劳动关系的法律法规体系，建立了劳动合同和集体合同制度、三方协调机制、劳动标准体系、劳动争议处理体制和劳动保障监察制度，与社会主义市场经济相适应的新型劳动关系基本形成。
In the course of establishing and improving the socialist market economy system, labor relations in China have become increasingly complicated and diversified. China commits itself to the maintenance of harmonious and stable labor relations. It has formed an initial system of laws and regulations, with the Labor Law of the People's Republic of China as the main body, to adjust labor relations, and has established the labor contract and group contract systems, tripartite coordination mechanism, labor standard system, labor dispute handling system and labor protection supervisory system, basically shaping up a new type of labor relations in consonance with the socialist market economy.
    
实行劳动合同制度
    Instituting a Labor Contract System
中国的劳动合同制度从二十世纪八十年代中期开始试点，在九十年代得到大力推行，至今已在城镇各类企业中广泛实施。中国的法律规定，用人单位与劳动者依法建立劳动关系，应该书面订立有固定期限、无固定期限或以完成一定的工作为期限的劳动合同；在订立劳动合同过程中，劳动关系双方必须遵循平等自愿、协商一致的原则。实行劳动合同制度，明确了劳动者与用人单位双方的权利和义务，保障了劳动者择业自主权和用人单位的用人自主权。
China started to try out a labor contract system in the mid-1980s, and energetically promoted it in the 1990s. As a result, the labor contract system is now universally implemented in urban enterprises of every description. Chinese laws stipulate that employers and employees shall establish labor relations in accordance with the law, and conclude written labor contracts, with or without fixed periods, or with a period to complete the prescribed work; during the conclusion of the labor contract, the two parties to the contract must abide by the principles of equality, voluntariness and reaching unanimity through consultation. The labor contract system clarifies the rights and obligations of the employers and employees, and safeguards the employees' right to select jobs and the employers' right to select employees.
 
建立集体合同制度
    Establishing a Group Contract System
中国政府鼓励企业不断加强职工代表大会和工会的职能，完善职工民主参与制度。为形成企业劳动关系自我协调机制，中国开始探索通过平等协商建立集体合同制度，并加以推广。中国的法律法规规定，企业职工可以就劳动报酬、工作时间、休息休假和劳动安全卫生、保险福利等事项，由工会代表或直接推荐职工代表与企业开展平等协商，签订集体合同。平等协商形式多样，集体合同内容丰富。多数企业采取由本单位工会与企业协商签订集体合同的形式。
The Chinese government encourages enterprises to continuously strengthen the functions of the workers' congresses and trade unions, and improve the system of employees' democratic participation. To form a self-coordination mechanism of labor relations in enterprises, China has trial-implemented and promoted a group contract system through equal consultation. Chinese laws and regulations stipulate that employees of an enterprise may conduct equal consultation and sign group contracts with that enterprise via trade union representatives or representatives directly recommended by the employees themselves, with regard to labor remuneration, working hours, rest and vacation, labor safety, labor hygiene, insurance, welfare and other matters. Equal consultation takes diversified forms, and group contracts have wide-ranging contents. Signing group contracts through consultation between the trade union and the enterprise has now been adopted by most enterprises.
近年来，集体合同制度不仅在非国有企业推广，而且在国有企业的改革过程中也得到逐步推行。截至2001年底，全国企业签订并报送劳动和社会保障行政部门备案的集体合同已达27万份。
In recent years, the group contract system has not only been popularized in non-state enterprises, but also been gradually carried out during the reform of state-owned enterprises. By the end of 2001, the number of group contracts signed by enterprises nationwide and submitted to the labor and social security administration departments for the record had reached 270,000.
    
建立三方协调机制
    Setting Up a Tripartite Coordination Mechanism
中国积极建立符合本国国情的政府、工会和企业三方协调机制。这种协调机制，由各级政府劳动和社会保障部门、工会组织、企业组织派出代表，组成协调机构，对涉及劳动关系的重大问题进行沟通和协商，对拟订有关劳动和社会保障法规以及涉及三方利益调整的重大改革方案和政策措施提出建议。
China has made active efforts to establish a government-trade union-enterprise tripartite coordination mechanism in conformity with its actual conditions. In this mechanism, representatives from government labor and social security departments at all levels, trade unions and enterprises constitute a coordination organ to conduct communication and consultation on major problems relating to labor relations, and put forth suggestions on the drafting of labor and social security regulations, major reform programs, policies and measures concerning the interests readjustment of the three parties.
　　2001年8月，中国劳动和社会保障部同中华全国总工会、中国企业联合会建立了国家协调劳动关系三方会议制度，并召开了第一次国家级协调劳动关系三方会议，使中国的劳动关系协调工作有了一个较为规范和稳定的工作机制。目前，北京、天津、河北、山西、江苏等十多个省、直辖市以及深圳、大连等城市已建立了地区性劳动关系三方协调机制。其中，山西、江苏等省还在省、地(市)、县(区)三个层次建立了三方协调机制。
    In August 2001, the Ministry of Labor and Social Security, All-China Federation of Trade Unions and China Enterprise Association jointly established the State Tripartite Conference System of Labor Relations Coordination, and convened the first national tripartite conference of labor relations coordination, setting a standard and stable operating mechanism for China's labor relations coordination. So far, a dozen provinces and municipalities, including Beijing, Tianjin, Hebei, Shanxi and Jiangsu, and the two cities of Shenzhen and Dalian have set up regional tripartite coordination mechanisms for labor relations. Among them, Shanxi and Jiangsu provinces have established such mechanisms at the provincial, prefecture/city, and county/district levels.
完善劳动标准体系
    Bettering the Labor Standard System
中国政府重视合理确定、依法公布、适时调整劳动标准，保障劳动者合法权益，促进经济和社会发展。目前，中国已初步形成了以《中华人民共和国劳动法》为核心，内容涉及工时、休息休假、工资、禁止使用童工、女职工和未成年工特殊劳动保护、劳动定额、职业安全卫生等方面的劳动标准体系，并根据经济和社会的发展不断调整和完善。
The Chinese government attaches great importance to rationally determining, legally promulgating and timely adjusting labor standards to guarantee the lawful rights and interests of workers and promote economic and social development. At present, a labor standard system is basically in place, centering on the Labor Law of the People's Republic of China and covering areas such as working hours, rest and vacation, wage, prohibition of the use of child labor, special labor protection for women employees and under-age workers, work quotas and job safety and hygiene. The system has been adjusted and improved along with the country's economic and social development.
为保证劳动者享有正常工作和休息休假的权益，中国目前实行劳动者每日工作时间不超过8小时、平均每周工作时间不超过40小时的工时制度。用人单位延长工作时间时，必须与工会和劳动者协商，一般每日不得超过1小时，特殊原因每日不得超过3小时，每月不得超过36小时。在休息休假方面，劳动者依法享有法定节假日及每周至少休息1日的权利。
To ensure that all workers enjoy the right to work, rest and vacation, China adopts an eight-hour-day, 40-hour-week system. When the employing unit needs to extend working hours, they must consult with the trade union or the workers, and generally the extension should not surpass one hour a day, in special cases not more than three hours a day or not more than 36 hours a month. All workers are entitled to enjoy legal holidays and at least one day off a week.
国家禁止未满16周岁的未成年人就业，严格查处非法使用童工的行为。对于女职工和未成年工(年满16周岁，未满18周岁)，国家禁止用人单位安排他们从事国家明确规定禁忌从事的劳动。中国在职业安全卫生方面制定了国家标准、行业标准和地方标准。为了完善职业安全卫生管理制度，中国政府于1999年公布了职业安全卫生管理体系标准，并开展了认证工作。目前，中国已制定国家和行业劳动定额定员标准200多项，公布了职业分类标准和职业技能标准等其他劳动标准。
The state prohibits hiring people under the age of 16, and punishes the illegal employment of child labor. The state prohibits all employers from hiring women and minors (ages 16 to less than 18) for tasks explicitly prohibited by state regulations. China has formulated national, trade and local standards on job safety and hygiene. In order to improve the management system of job safety and hygiene, in 1999 the Chinese government promulgated related standards, at the same time starting attestation work. So far, China has worked out more than 200 national and trade standards on work and personnel quotas. It has also promulgated other labor standards, such as job classification standards and job skill standards.
　　为保证劳动标准的科学性和合理性，并使其得到顺利实施，中国在制订、公布和调整劳动标准过程中，都要向工会组织、企业组织以及专家学者广泛征求意见。中国政府一贯主张劳动标准必须与本国经济和社会发展水平相协调，保障基本人权，促进国民经济发展和社会进步，并在此基础上逐步提高水平。中国重视国际社会关于制订和实施劳动标准的经验，并结合本国经济和社会发展的实际，适时加入有关国际劳工公约。
    To ensure that labor standards are scientific and rational and that they are implemented smoothly, the government solicits suggestions from trade unions, enterprises, specialists and scholars while formulating, promulgating or adjusting labor standards. The Chinese government has always maintained that labor standards must be in sync with the country's level of economic and social development, that they should guarantee basic human rights and promote economic development and social progress, and on this basis should be gradually improved. China values the experience of other countries in formulating and implementing labor standards and, in time, will accede to relevant international labor conventions in line with the actual conditions of its economic and social development.
健全劳动争议处理体制
    Improving the System for Handling Labor Disputes
中国政府主张及时依法处理劳动纠纷，维护当事人双方的合法权益，提倡和支持劳动争议双方采取自行协商的方式解决争议。中国有关法律法规明确规定了依法解决劳动争议的程序和机构。按照规定，劳动者与企业发生劳动争议后，当事人一方可向企业内部劳动争议调解委员会申请调解，调解不成或当事人不愿意进行调解时，也可向当地劳动争议仲裁委员会申请仲裁；当事人对仲裁机构的仲裁裁决不服，可向人民法院提起诉讼。
The Chinese government holds that all labor disputes should be handled according to law and in a timely fashion, and that the lawful rights and interests of both parties involved should be protected. It encourages both parties in a dispute to solve their problems through negotiation and consultation. Chinese laws and regulations clearly define the procedures and organs responsible for the settlement of labor disputes. According to the regulations, whenever a labor dispute arises between a worker and an enterprise, either party may apply to the labor dispute mediation committee at the enterprise for mediation. If the mediation fails or if neither party wants mediation, then they may apply to the local labor dispute arbitration committee for arbitration. If either party is not satisfied with the decision of the arbitration committee, he or she may file a lawsuit with a people's court.
截止到2001年底，全国已建立县级以上(含县级)劳动争议仲裁委员会3192个，专职和兼职劳动仲裁员近2万人。从1993年8月1日《中华人民共和国企业劳动争议处理条例》公布至2001年底，全国各级劳动争议仲裁委员会共立案受理劳动争议案件68.8万件，涉及劳动者236.8万人，结案率始终保持在90%以上。此外，各级劳动争议仲裁委员会还以非立案方式处理劳动争议50.3万件。
By the end of 2001 China had established 3,192 labor dispute arbitration committees at the county-level or above, consisting of nearly 20,000 full-time and part-time arbitrators. From August 1, 1993, when the Regulations of the People's Republic of China Concerning the Handling of Labor Disputes in Enterprises was promulgated, to the end of 2001, labor dispute arbitration committees across the country officially handled 688,000 labor disputes, which involved 2,368,000 workers. More than 90 percent of these disputes were settled. Besides, labor dispute arbitration committees at various levels handled 503,000 labor disputes that did not officially file for the record with them.
    
建立劳动保障监察制度
    Setting Up a Labor Security Supervision System
自1993年以来，中国逐步建立了劳动保障监察制度。《中华人民共和国劳动法》、《中华人民共和国行政处罚法》等法律法规规定了劳动保障监察机构的职责和工作程序。劳动和社会保障行政部门依法对用人单位遵守劳动和社会保障法律法规的情况进行监督检查，对违反劳动和社会保障法律法规的行为有权制止、责令改正，并可依法给予警告、罚款等行政处罚。任何组织和个人对于违反劳动和社会保障法律法规的行为都有权检举和控告；当事人认为劳动和社会保障行政部门在实施监察执法时侵犯了其合法权益，可以提起行政复议或行政诉讼。
In 1993, China embarked on the establishment of a supervision system for labor security. The Labor Law of the People's Republic of China and Law of the People's Republic of China on Administrative Punishment stipulates the responsibilities and work procedures of labor security supervision organs. Labor and social security administration departments supervise all employers to make sure they observe labor and social security laws and regulations. They have the right to halt any violation of these laws and regulations and order the violator to correct it; they may also issue disciplinary warnings or impose fines on the violator. Any organization or individual has the right to report or file a complaint about any act that violates labor and social security laws or regulations. When a person concerned thinks that a labor and social security administration department has violated his or her legitimate rights in the course of supervision and execution of the laws, he or she may initiate an administrative review or bring an administrative suit.
　　中国各级劳动和社会保障部门按照依法行政、严格执法的原则，不断加强劳动和社会保障行政执法力度，建立健全劳动保障监察组织。截止到2001年底，全国共建立劳动保障监察机构3174个，配备劳动保障监察员4万人。
    According to the principle of promoting law-based administration and enforcing laws strictly, labor and social security administration departments at all levels have constantly strengthened their law enforcement and established or improved labor security supervision organizations. By the end of 2001, China had set up 3,174 labor security supervision organs, with 40,000 labor security supervisors.
改革工资收入分配制度
    Reforming the Wage and Income Distribution System
中国政府坚持以按劳分配为主体、多种分配方式并存的制度，体现效率优先、兼顾公平的原则。通过改革工资制度，发挥市场机制对工资收入的调节作用，使劳动者的工资收入水平随着经济发展和企业效益的增长相应提高。《中华人民共和国劳动法》和《企业最低工资规定》、《工资支付暂行规定》等法律法规，对规范工资分配行为作出了明确规定。中国政府依法制订和适时调整最低工资标准，规范工资支付办法，定期向社会发布工资指导线、劳动力市场工资指导价位和人工成本信息，鼓励企业试行工资集体协商制度，引导企业采用灵活多样的工资制度和分配形式，维护企业的工资分配自主权和劳动者依法获得劳动报酬的权利。目前，全国基本建立了最低工资制度，有1万多户企业开展工资集体协商试点，26个省、自治区、直辖市发布了工资指导线，88个城市发布了劳动力市场工资指导价位。
The Chinese government adheres to a diversified distribution system with distribution according to work as the main form. The principle is to give priority to efficiency with due consideration to fairness. Reforms are being made to the wage system so that market mechanism can play its regulatory role in the distribution of income and that workers' incomes can increase as the economy develops and enterprises' economic returns increase. The Labor Law of the People's Republic of China, Regulations on Minimum Wages in Enterprises and Provisional Regulations on Wage Payments contain clear-cut provisions on standardizing the distribution of wages. The Chinese government formulates minimum wage standards according to law and makes timely adjustments to them, standardizes wage payment methods, and regularly issues information regarding wage guidelines, guidance wage levels for the labor market, and labor costs. It encourages enterprises to trial-implement the system of collective wage negotiation and guides them to adopt diverse wage systems and distribution forms. While safeguarding enterprises' right to independent decision-making in the matter of wage distribution, the government also guarantees workers' right to receive the remuneration for their work according to law. At present, a minimum wage system has been basically established across the country, and more than 10,000 enterprises have started to experiment with pilot wage schemes through collective negotiations. Twenty-six provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the Central Government regularly release wage guidelines, and 88 cities publicize guidance wage levels for the labor market.
改革开放以来，随着经济的快速发展，城镇职工工资收入不断增长。到2001年底，中国城镇职工平均货币工资达到10870元，是1978年的16.3倍，扣除物价因素后，职工实际平均工资水平年平均递增5.5%。
Since China adopted the reform and opening-up policy in late 1978, the national economy has developed rapidly, and the wages of urban employees have kept increasing. By the end of 2001, their annual per-capita money wages had reached 10,870 yuan, 16.3 times the figure for 1978. After allowing for inflation, the average annual increase rate was 5.5 percent in real terms.
    
社会保障体系初步建立
     The Establishment of a Social Security System
　　为促进经济发展和社会稳定，逐步提高广大人民群众的生活水平和社会保障待遇，中国政府致力于建设一个与社会主义市场经济体制相适应的健全的社会保障体系。经过多年的探索和实践，以社会保险、社会救济、社会福利、优抚安置和社会互助为主要内容，多渠道筹集保障资金、管理服务逐步社会化的社会保障体系已初步建立起来。
    In order to promote economic development and social stability, and to gradually raise the living standards and social security benefits of the general public, the Chinese government has made every effort to establish a sound social security system that corresponds with the socialist market economy system. After years of exploration and practice, a social security system has been basically set up, consisting mainly of social insurance, social relief, social welfare, social mutual help and special care for disabled ex-servicemen and family members of revolutionary martyrs, and featuring the raising of funds through various channels and the gradual socialization of management and services.
社会保障制度改革
    Reforming the Social Security System
自二十世纪八十年代初开始，中国政府对社会保障制度进行了一系列的改革。改革的目标是：建立独立于企业事业单位之外、资金来源多元化、保障制度规范化、管理服务社会化的社会保障体系。其主要特征是：基本保障，广泛覆盖，多个层次，逐步统一。与经济发展水平相适应，国家强制建立的基本保障主要满足人们的基本生活需要；社会保障逐步覆盖全体公民；在基本保障之外，国家积极推动其他保障形式的发展，力争形成多层次的社会保障体系；通过改革与发展，逐步实行全国统一的社会保障制度。经过十几年的努力，目前，社会保险制度的基本政策已经制定并陆续颁布和实施，覆盖了大多数城镇职工和离退休人员，部分地区还把流动到城市就业的农民工也纳入进来；在城市普遍建立了居民最低生活保障制度。2001年，中国政府开始在辽宁省开展完善城镇社会保障体系的综合试点。
Since the early 1980s, the Chinese government has carried out a sequence of reforms in its social security system with the goal of establishing a standardized social security system independent of enterprises and institutions, funded from various channels, and with socialized management and services - a system characterized mainly by basic security, wide coverage, multiple levels and steady unification. Under this mandatory state basic security, people's basic living needs will be met corresponding with China's economic development level, and the social security network will cover all citizens step by step. Besides basic security, the state will actively promote other types of social security so as to form a multi-level social security system. Through reform and development, a nationally unified social security system will be put into practice step by step. Through more than a decade's efforts, basic social insurance policies have been formulated, and successively promulgated and implemented, covering the vast majority of urban staff and retirees, and in some regions even rural people working in cities are included. A social security system that guarantees urbanites a minimum standard of living has been established across China. In 2001, the Chinese government began a pilot program in Liaoning Province, aimed at improving the existing social security system in cities.
二十世纪九十年代中期以来，为加强各项社会保障制度的统一规划和社会保障基金的管理、监督，中国政府对社会保障管理体制进行了一系列改革。把过去由多个行政部门分别管理的社会保险转变为由劳动和社会保障行政部门统一管理，各级劳动和社会保障行政部门也建立了相应的社会保险经办机构，承担社会保险具体事务的管理工作。过去由企业承担的社会保险事务逐步转变为由社会机构管理，即社会保险待遇实行社会化发放，社会保险对象实行社区管理。中国政府加强了对社会保险基金的行政管理和社会监督工作。社会保险基金被纳入财政专户，实行收支两条线管理，专款专用。各级劳动和社会保障行政部门专门设立了社会保险基金监督机构，负责对社会保险基金的征缴、管理和支付进行检查、监督，对违法违规问题进行查处。此外，中国政府还通过强化基金征缴和提高社会保障支出占财政支出的比重等一系列措施，努力拓宽社会保障资金的来源。仅2001年一年，中央财政用于社会保障支出的资金就达982亿元，是1998年的5.18倍。中国政府专门成立了全国社会保障基金理事会，负责通过减持国有股所获资金、中央财政投入的资金及其他各种方式筹集的社会保障资金的运营和管理。
Since the mid-1990s, the Chinese government has undertaken reforms to the social security management system in order to bring all social security systems under unified planning, and better manage and supervise the use of social security funds. Social insurance, which was previously governed by a number of administrative departments, is now under the centralized management of the labor and social security administration departments. Labor and social security administration departments at all levels have established offices to handle the daily routine of social insurance. The handling of social insurance affairs that used to be the responsibility of enterprises are gradually being transferred to social organizations, namely beneficiaries now get their social insurance benefits from organizations in their own communities and are subjected to the latter's administration. The Chinese government has strengthened administrative and social supervision over social insurance funds. These funds have been orbited into special accounts and a system has been set up, whereby revenue and expenditure are managed separately and the funds are used for specified purposes only. Labor and social security administration departments at all levels have established supervisory organs to examine and supervise the collection, management and payment of social insurance funds. They also investigate and punish those who violate the pertinent laws and regulations. In addition, the Chinese government has adopted a large body of measures to increase the sources of social security funds, such as strengthening the collection of social security funds and raising the ratio of such funds in the overall financial expenditure. In 2001, the central finance allocated 98.2 billion yuan to be used for social security payments, 5.18 times the figure for 1998. The Chinese government has established a National Social Security Fund Executive Council specially responsible for the operation and administration of the funds acquired from reducing state shareholding, the funds put in by the central finance and social security funds collected from other channels. The National Social Security Fund comes from the central finance appropriations as well as from other channels.
　　1998年以来，中国政府采取了“两个确保”措施。一是确保国有企业下岗职工的基本生活，在国有企业普遍建立下岗职工再就业服务中心，由再就业服务中心为下岗职工发放基本生活费，并为他们缴纳社会保险费，所需资金由政府财政、企业和社会(主要是失业保险基金)三方面共同筹集。同时，组织下岗职工参加职业指导和再就业培训，引导和帮助他们实现再就业。二是确保离退休人员的基本生活，保证按时足额发放基本养老金。为保证“两个确保”的实施，中国政府提出与“两个确保”相衔接的“三条保障线”政策：国有企业下岗职工在再就业服务中心最长可领取三年的基本生活费；三年期满仍未实现再就业的，可继续领取失业保险金，领取时间最长为两年；享受失业保险金期满仍未就业的，可申请领取城市居民最低生活保障金。到2001年，绝大多数国有企业下岗职工领到基本生活费，离退休人员养老金基本实现按时足额发放。“两个确保”的实施，为维护下岗职工、离退休人员的合法权益和社会稳定发挥了重大作用。
    Since 1998, the Chinese government has adopted a "two guarantees" policy. The first is a guarantee of the basic livelihood of the laid-off personnel from state-owned enterprises. Reemployment service centers for those laid-offs have been established in all state-owned enterprises. They give laid-off personnel allowances for basic living expenses and pay social insurance premiums for them, with the required funds coming from the government budget, enterprises and other sources (mainly unemployment insurance funds). They also provide job guidance and organize reemployment training programs to help laid-off personnel find new jobs. The second guarantee is to ensure basic livelihood for all retirees and that they receive basic pensions in full and on time. To ensure the implementation of the "two guarantees," the Chinese government has put forth three corresponding policies: Laid-offs from state-owned enterprises can receive a basic living allowance from the reemployment service centers for a maximum of three years; if they still haven't found a job by then, they can receive unemployment insurance payments for a maximum of two years; at the end of the two-year period, if they still haven't been reemployed, they can apply for the minimum living allowance paid to urban residents. By 2001, the vast majority of people laid off by state-owned enterprises were receiving a basic living allowance, and retired personnel were receiving their pensions in full and on time. Thus the "two guarantees" policy has played a major role in safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of laid-off and retired personnel, and in maintaining social stability.
养老保险制度
    The Old-Age Insurance System
1984年，中国各地进行养老保险制度改革。1997年，中国政府制定了《关于建立统一的企业职工基本养老保险制度的决定》，开始在全国建立统一的城镇企业职工基本养老保险制度。
Reform of the old-age insurance system was initiated throughout China in 1984. In 1997, the Chinese government adopted a Decision on Establishing a Uniform Basic Old-Age Insurance System for Enterprise Employees, in light of which efforts were started along this line in urban areas nationwide.
中国的基本养老保险制度实行社会统筹与个人账户相结合的模式。基本养老保险覆盖城镇各类企业的职工；城镇所有企业及其职工必须履行缴纳基本养老保险费的义务。目前，企业的缴费比例为工资总额的20%左右，个人缴费比例为本人工资的8%。企业缴纳的基本养老保险费一部分用于建立统筹基金，一部分划入个人账户；个人缴纳的基本养老保险费计入个人账户。基本养老金由基础养老金和个人账户养老金组成，基础养老金由社会统筹基金支付，月基础养老金为职工社会平均工资的20%，月个人账户养老金为个人账户基金积累额的1/120。个人账户养老金可以继承。对于新制度实施前参加工作、实施后退休的职工，还要加发过渡性养老金。
The basic Chinese old-age insurance system combines mutual assistance programs with personal accounts. Employees of all urban enterprises may participate in the basic old-age insurance program, and all enterprises and employees in towns and cities have the obligation to pay the basic old-age insurance premiums. At present, about 20 percent of the enterprise wage bill and 8 percent of personal wage should go to such insurance. Part of the basic insurance premiums from enterprises is used to set up mutual assistance funds, and the rest goes to personal accounts. The basic old-age insurance premiums paid by the individuals go entirely to their personal accounts. The basic old-age pension is in two parts: the base pension and the pension in personal accounts. The base pension is covered by the mutual assistance funds, the monthly sum amounting to 20 percent of the average social wage of the employees and the monthly pension in personal accounts come to 1/120 of the accumulated amount in personal accounts. Pensions in personal accounts can be inherited. Those who started working before, and retired after, the implementation of this new system are entitled to an additional pension for the transitional period.
经过几年的推进，基本养老保险的参保职工已由1997年末的8671万人增加到2001年末的10801万人；领取基本养老金人数由2533万人增加到3381万人，平均月基本养老金也由430元增加到56元。为确保基本养老金的按时足额发放，近年来中国政府努力提高基本养老保险基金的统筹层次，逐步实行省级统筹，不断加大对基本养老保险基金的财政投入。1998年至2001年，仅中央财政对基本养老保险补贴支出就达861亿元。目前，基本实现了基本养老金由社会服务机构(如银行、邮局)发放，2001年基本养老金社会化发放率达到98%。此外，机关事业单位职工和退休人员仍实行原有的养老保障制度。
Employees participating in the old-age insurance program increased from 86.71 million in late 1997 to 108.02 million by the end of 2001, after several years of implementation of the program. The number of those enjoying basic old-age pension also increased from 25.33 million to 33.81 million, with the average monthly basic pension per person growing from 430 yuan to 556 yuan. To ensure the timely and full payment of the pension, the Chinese government in recent years has tried to raise the basic old-age insurance fund under the mutual assistance program gradually to the provincial level, coupled with a steady increase of the financial input in that direction. From 1998 to 2001, the subsidy outlay for this from the central finance alone attained the grand total of 86.1 billion yuan. Now basic old-age pensions are mostly delivered through social service institutions, such as banks and post offices. In 2001, 98 percent of these pensions was delivered in this way. The existing old-age security system for employees and retirees from government institutions remain unchanged.
　　1991年，中国部分农村地区开始进行养老保险制度试点。农村养老保险制度以“个人交费为主、集体补助为辅、政府给予政策扶持”为基本原则，实行基金积累的个人账户模式。
    In 1991, China began to try out the old-age insurance system in some of the rural areas. The basic principle for the rural old-age insurance system is that the premiums are to be paid mainly by the beneficiaries themselves, supplemented by collectively pooled subsidy and supported by government policies, the accumulation of funds taking the form of personal accounts.
医疗保险制度
    The Medical Insurance System
1988年，中国政府开始对机关事业单位的公费医疗制度和国有企业的劳保医疗制度进行改革。1998年，中国政府颁布了《关于建立城镇职工基本医疗保险制度的决定》，开始在全国建立城镇职工基本医疗保险制度。
In 1988, the Chinese government began to reform the free medicare system in government institutions and the labor protection medicare system in state-owned enterprises. In 1998, the government issued the Decision on Establishing the Basic Medical Insurance System for Urban Employees, enforcing a basic medical insurance system for urban employees throughout the country.
中国的基本医疗保险制度实行社会统筹与个人账户相结合的模式。基本医疗保险基金原则上实行地市级统筹。基本医疗保险覆盖城镇所有用人单位及其职工；所有企业、国家行政机关、事业单位和其他单位及其职工必须履行缴纳基本医疗保险费的义务。目前，用人单位的缴费比例为工资总额的6%左右，个人缴费比例为本人工资的2%。单位缴纳的基本医疗保险费一部分用于建立统筹基金,一部分划入个人账户；个人缴纳的基本医疗保险费计入个人账户。统筹基金和个人账户分别承担不同的医疗费用支付责任。统筹基金主要用于支付住院和部分慢性病门诊治疗的费用，统筹基金设有起付标准、最高支付限额；个人账户主要用于支付一般门诊费用。
China's basic medical insurance system also combines social mutual assistance programs with personal accounts. In principle, the basic medical insurance funds come in the form of mutual assistance programs at prefectural and city levels. The basic medical insurance covers all urban employers and employees, and all enterprises, state administrative departments, institutions and other organizations and their staff members and workers have the obligation to pay the basic medical insurance premiums. At present, about 6 percent of the wage bill of employing units and 2 percent of personal wages should be paid as part of the medical insurance premiums. Part of the insurance premiums from employing units goes to the funds under the mutual assistance program, and the rest to the employees' personal accounts. The personal insurance premiums go entirely to personal accounts. The mutual assistance funds and personal accounts are used to pay for different types of medical costs: The former mainly for hospitalization and outpatient services in the case of certain chronic diseases, with a set starting standard and a maximum norm, and the latter mainly for general outpatient services.
为保障参保职工享有基本的医疗服务并有效控制医疗费用的过快增长，中国政府加强了对医疗服务的管理，制定了基本医疗保险药品目录、诊疗项目和医疗服务设施标准，对提供基本医疗保险服务的医疗机构、药店进行资格认定并允许参保职工进行选择。为配合基本医疗保险制度改革，国家同时推动医疗机构和药品生产流通体制的改革。通过建立医疗机构之间的竞争机制和药品生产流通的市场运行机制，努力实现“用比较低廉的费用提供比较优质的医疗服务”的目标。
To ensure that employees covered by the insurance program enjoy basic medical service and the service charges do not increase too rapidly, the Chinese government has strengthened its administration of medical services by specifying a list of medicines, medicare service items and standards of medicare facilities to be covered by basic medical insurance and evaluating the qualifications of the medical institutions and pharmacies that provide basic medical insurance service, and allowing those who participate in the program the right to make their own choices. To support the reform of the basic medical insurance system, the government has also initiated a reform of the medical institutions and the medicine production and circulation system. A mechanism of competition between medical institutions and a market operating mechanism for medicine production and circulation have also been set up for "better medical service at lower cost."
在基本医疗保险之外，各地还普遍建立了大额医疗费用互助制度，以解决社会统筹基金最高支付限额之上的医疗费用。国家为公务员建立了医疗补助制度。有条件的企业可以为职工建立企业补充医疗保险。国家还将逐步建立社会医疗救助制度，为贫困人口提供基本医疗保障。
Apart from the basic medical insurance, a system of mutual help in the case of large-amount medical costs has been set up throughout the country to cover medical costs in excess of the maximum coverage under the mutual assistance program. The state has also set up a medical subsidy program for civil servants. Enterprises are encouraged to set up enterprise supplementary medical insurance for their employees, where conditions permit. The state will also, step by step, institute a social medicare assistance system to provide basic medical security for the impoverished population.
　　中国的基本医疗保险制度改革正稳步推进，基本医疗保险的覆盖范围不断扩大。到2001年底，全国97%的地市启动了基本医疗保险改革，参加基本医疗保险的职工达7629万人。此外，公费医疗和其他形式的医疗保障制度还覆盖了一亿多的城镇人口，中国政府正在将这些人口逐步纳入到基本医疗保险制度中。
    The reform of the basic medical insurance system is being carried out steadily in China, with a continued increase in the coverage of basic medical insurance. By the end of 2001, 97 percent of prefectures and cities had started such reform programs, and 76.29 million employees had participated in basic medical insurance programs. In addition, free medical service and other forms of medicare security systems cover over 100 million urbanites. The Chinese government is now working to incorporate these people gradually in the basic medical insurance system.
失业保险制度
    The Unemployment Insurance System
在中华人民共和国成立初期，曾实行过短暂的失业救济制度。此后，在计划经济体制下，由于实行统包统配的就业制度，失业救济制度逐步被取消。实行改革开放政策后，为适应国有企业经营机制的转换和劳动制度的重大改革，自1986年开始，中国政府逐步建立起失业保险制度，为职工失业后的基本生活提供保障。
Shortly after the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, an unemployment relief system was introduced for a short period of time. Later, with the institution of the employment system featuring unified job assignment under the planned economy system, the relief system had gradually gone out of the picture. Following the adoption of the reform and opening-up policy the Chinese government began to set up an unemployment insurance system in 1986 to adapt to the changes in the operating mechanism of state-owned enterprises and the major reform of the labor system, so as to guarantee basic livelihood for laid-off employees.
1999年，中国政府颁布《失业保险条例》，把失业保险制度建设推进到一个新的发展阶段。失业保险覆盖城镇所有企业、事业单位及其职工；所有企业、事业单位及其职工必须缴纳失业保险费。单位的缴费比例为工资总额的2%，个人缴费比例为本人工资的1%。享受失业保险待遇需要满足三方面的条件：缴纳失业保险费满一年；非因本人意愿中断就业；已经办理失业登记并有求职要求。失业保险待遇主要是失业保险金。失业保险金按月发放，标准低于最低工资标准、高于城市居民最低生活保障标准。领取失业保险金的期限根据缴费年限确定，最长为24个月。失业者在领取失业保险金期间患病，还可领取医疗补助金；失业者在领取失业保险金期间死亡，其遗属可领取丧葬补助金和遗属抚恤金。此外，失业者在领取失业保险金期间还可接受职业培训和享受职业介绍补贴。
In 1999, the Chinese government issued the Regulations on Unemployment Insurance, pushing the unemployment insurance system building onto a new stage of development. This system covers all urban enterprises and institutions and their staff, whereby all enterprises and institutions and their staff must pay the insurance premiums, the former paying 2 percent of their wage bill and the latter 1 percent of their personal wages. Three conditions are to be met to enjoy the benefits of the unemployment insurance: One full year of the insurance premium has been paid; suspension of employment is not voluntary; and unemployment has been registered and application for reemployment filed. Unemployment insurance benefits consist mainly of unemployment insurance money, which the beneficiary can draw every month, with the standard lower than the minimum wage but higher than the minimum living allowance for urban residents. The period for drawing insurance money depends on the length of period for which one has paid the premiums, the maximum being 24 months. If the employed person is ill during the period he or she is entitled to draw unemployment insurance money, he or she is also entitled to medical subsidies. If the unemployed person dies during this period, his or her family can receive funeral subsidies and his or her dependants can receive pension for the deceased. In addition, the unemployed person may receive vocational training and subsidies for job agency services when drawing the unemployment insurance money.
　　近年来，失业保险的覆盖面不断扩大，保障对象不断增加。从1998年到2001年，失业保险参保人数由7928万人扩大到10355万人。2001年末领取失业保险金的人数为312万人。随着失业保险制度的完善，国有企业下岗职工基本生活保障制度正逐步纳入失业保险。
    In recent years, the coverage of unemployment insurance has grown continuously, with the number of the insurance policy underwriters increasing from 79.28 million in 1998 to 103.55 million in 2001. The number of people who did not draw unemployment insurance money was 3.12 million in 2001. With the improvement of the unemployment insurance system, the basic livelihood guarantee system for laid-offs from state-owned enterprises is being gradually orbited into this system.
工伤保险制度
    The Industrial Injury Insurance System
二十世纪八十年代末，中国政府开始对工伤保险进行改革。1996年，中国政府有关部门出台了《企业职工工伤保险试行办法》，开始在部分地区建立工伤保险制度。同年，中国政府有关部门还制定了《职工工伤和职业病致残程度鉴定标准》，为鉴定工伤和职业病致残程度提供了依据。
In the late 1980s, the Chinese government began its reform of insurance covering injuries suffered on the job. In 1996, the government issued the Trial Procedures for Industrial Injury Insurance for Enterprise Employees, to be followed by the establishment of relevant systems in some of the regions. In the same year, the Standards for Appraising Industrial Injuries and Disabilities Caused by Occupational Diseases was adopted by the government department concerned, providing the basis for such appraisal.
《企业职工工伤保险试行办法》规定：工伤保险费由企业缴纳，职工个人不缴费。工伤保险缴费实行行业差别费率和企业浮动费率。根据不同行业的工伤事故风险和职业危害程度确定不同的行业费率；在行业费率的基础上，根据企业上一年实际的工伤事故风险和工伤保险基金支出情况确定每个企业当年的具体费率。
The Trial Procedures for Industrial Injury Insurance for Enterprise Employees states that industrial injury insurance premiums shall be paid by enterprises instead of by employees themselves. The rate of industrial injury insurance premium varies according to different trades, and it may fluctuate with the situation of the individual enterprise. The rate of premiums is determined on the basis of the level of industrial injury risks and that of occupational danger in different trades. Based on the trade insurance rates, the specific premium rate of the year for an enterprise is decided according to its actual number of industrial injuries and risks and the outlays of the insurance funds in the previous year.
　　工伤保险基金支付的待遇主要包括：工伤医疗期发生的医疗费用；工伤医疗期结束后根据劳动能力丧失程度确定的伤残补助金、抚恤金、伤残护理费等。2001年底，全国平均工伤保险费率为1%左右，参加工伤保险的职工达4345万人。没有参加工伤保险的单位，仍由该单位承担支付工伤待遇的责任。
    Payment of industrial injury insurance funds covers mainly medical costs sustained during the treatment of the injury, and the injury or disability subsidies, pension for the disabled person or family of a deceased person, and injury or disability nursing charge, all of which are to be determined according to the degree of disability upon termination of the medical treatment. By the end of 2001, the national average rate of industrial injury insurance premium was about 1 percent, with over 43.45 million employees covered by the industrial injury insurance scheme. Enterprises not having acceded to such scheme are responsible for covering the industrial injury expenses themselves.
生育保险制度
    The Childbirth Insurance System
　　1988年以来，中国的一些地区开始进行企业生育保险制度的改革。1994年，在总结各地经验的基础上，中国政府有关部门制定了《企业职工生育保险试行办法》，其中规定，生育保险费由企业缴纳，职工个人不缴费。生育保险支付待遇主要包括：因生育发生的医疗费用和产假期间按月发放的生育津贴等。2001年底，全国平均生育保险费率为0.7%，参加生育保险的职工达3455万人。没有参加生育保险的单位，仍由该单位承担支付生育待遇的责任。
    Reform of the childbirth insurance system started in some enterprises in China in 1988. Based on a summing-up of the experience gained, the Chinese government mapped out the Trial Procedures for Childbirth Insurance for Enterprise Employees in 1994, which stipulates that the childbirth insurance premiums shall be paid by enterprises instead of by employees themselves. The insurance benefits cover mainly medical treatment for childbirth and monthly childbirth allowance for employees during maternity leave. By the end of 2001, the national average childbirth insurance expense rate was 0.7 percent, with 34.55 million employees covered by the insurance scheme. Enterprises not having acceded to such scheme are responsible for paying the childbirth expenses for their employees.
最低生活保障制度
    The Minimum Living Standard Security System
早在中华人民共和国成立初期，中国政府就建立了针对城乡贫困居民的社会救济制度。1993年，中国政府开始对城市社会救济制度进行改革，尝试建立最低生活保障制度。到1999年，全国所有城市和有建制镇的县城均建立了最低生活保障制度。同年，中国政府正式颁布了《城市居民最低生活保障条例》，为城市所有居民提供最基本的生活保障。
In the early years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, the government set up a social relief system for the urban and rural poor. In 1993, it began to reform the social relief system in cities, at the same time seeking to try out a minimum living standard security system. In 1999, this security system was established in all cities and organic county towns throughout the country. In the same year, the Chinese government officially promulgated the Regulations on Guaranteeing Urban Residents' Minimum Standard of Living to ensure the basic livelihood of all urban residents.
城市居民最低生活保障资金由地方人民政府列入财政预算。地方政府根据当地维持城市居民基本生活所必需的费用来确定最低生活保障标准。家庭人均收入低于最低生活保障标准的城市居民均可申请领取最低生活保障待遇。城市居民领取最低生活保障待遇需要经过家庭收入调查，领取的待遇水平为家庭人均收入与最低生活保障标准的差额部分。
Funds for this purpose are included in the fiscal budgets of the local people's governments, which determine the minimum living standard according to the cost necessary for maintaining the basic livelihood of the local urbanites. Urban residents whose average family income is lower than the minimum living standard can apply for the minimum living allowance. Investigation of the family's income shall be conducted before issuance of the minimum living allowance, the level of which is calculated in terms of the difference between the family per-capita income and the minimum living standard.
　　2001年，全国领取城市最低生活保障金的人数达1170.7万人，中央财政投入用于发放最低生活保障待遇的资金为23.01亿元。近年来，部分农村地区也开始建立了最低生活保障制度。
    In 2001, there were 11.707 million urban residents nationwide drawing the minimum living allowance, with 2.301 billion yuan for the minimum living allowance coming from the central finance. In recent years, part of the rural areas has started to set up a similar minimum living standard security system.
社会福利制度
    The Social Welfare System
中国社会福利制度是指政府出资为那些生活困难的老人、孤儿和残疾人等特殊困难群体提供生活保障而建立的制度。为保障特殊困难群体的生活权益，国家颁布了《中华人民共和国老年人权益保障法》、《中华人民共和国残疾人保障法》和《农村五保供养工作条例》等法律法规。有关法律法规规定：对城市孤寡老人、符合供养条件的残疾人和孤儿实行集中供养，对农村孤寡老人、符合供养条件的残疾人和孤儿实行集中供养与分散供养相结合；集中供养一般通过举办社会福利院、敬老院、疗养院、儿童福利院等福利机构进行；对于残疾人，通过政府的优惠政策来兴办多种形式的社会福利企业，帮助适合参加劳动的残疾人获得就业机会。
The social welfare system is a system established by the Chinese government to provide funds to ensure the livelihood of senior citizens, orphans and the handicapped persons who are in extraordinarily straitened circumstances. To protect the rights and interests of this special group of people, the government issued the Law of the People's Republic of China Guaranteeing the Rights and Interests of Senior Citizens, Law of the People's Republic of China on Protection of the Handicapped and Regulations Concerning Work on Providing "Five Guarantees" in the Rural Areas. The laws stipulate that in cities elderly widows and widowers who are childless and helpless and living alone, and eligible handicapped persons and orphans shall be supported and reside in special concentrated homes, while a combination of concentrated and scattered forms shall apply to those in the rural areas. Concentrated establishments include social welfare homes, old-age homes, sanatoriums, and children's welfare homes. For handicapped persons, government aid efforts include the formulation of preferential policies for establishing social welfare enterprises of diverse types to help create job opportunities for those who are able to work.
　　中国的社会福利事业取得了很大的成就。截至2001年底，全国有政府举办的社会福利机构3327个，收养了19.1万人；集体举办的社会福利机构3.5万个，收养66.8万人；民办社会福利机构934家，收养3.4万人；社会福利企业3.8万家，安置残疾职工69.9万人。此外,中国还通过发行社会福利彩票募集资金支持社会福利事业。2001年，福利事业共募集资金42亿元。
    China has achieved marked progress in its social welfare work. By the end of 2001, there were 3,327 government-run social welfare institutions with 191,000 inmates, 35,000 collective-run social welfare institutions with 668,000 inmates, 934 private-run social welfare institutions with 34,000 inmates, and 38,000 social welfare enterprises employing 699,000 handicapped people. Meanwhile, special lotteries have been instituted to collect funds for social welfare undertakings. In 2001 alone, the funds raised for these undertakings reached 4.2 billion yuan.
优抚安置制度
    The Special Care and Placement System
　　优抚安置制度是指对国家和社会有功劳的特殊社会群体给予补偿和褒扬的一种制度。目前，中国有3800多万优抚安置对象。为保障优抚安置对象的权益，国家陆续颁布了《革命烈士褒扬条例》、《军人抚恤优待条例》和《城镇退役士兵安置条例》等法规。这些法规规定：对于牺牲军人家属、革命伤残军人、老复员军人等重点优抚对象实行定期定量补助；对义务兵家属普遍发放优待金；对革命伤残军人等重点优抚对象实行医疗费用减免；城镇退役士兵可享受政府一次性就业安置，对自谋职业的安置对象发给一次性经济补助。1996年至2001年，国家各级财政累计投入抚恤资金为292亿元。
    This refers to the system aimed at compensating or commending the special group of people who have rendered meritorious services to the state and society. At present, more than 38 million people are included in this category. To ensure their rights and interests, the government has issued the Regulations on Honoring Revolutionary Martyrs, Regulations on Special Care and Treatment for Servicemen and Regulations on the Resettlement of Ex-Servicemen in Cities and Towns. These regulations stipulate that a regular and fixed-amount subsidy shall be given to the key recipients, such as dependents of fallen servicemen, disabled revolutionary servicemen and demobbed veterans, that dependents of conscripts be granted special allowances; that medical costs be reduced or waived for disabled revolutionary servicemen and other key special-care recipients; that demobbed soldiers shall enjoy a just-for-once job assignment from the government and those who wish to find jobs on their own be given subsidy in one lump sum. Special-care allowances to the tune of 29.2 billion yuan were allocated from state budgets at all levels from 1996 to 2001.
灾害救助制度
    The Natural Disaster Relief System
　　中国是一个自然灾害频繁的国家，大的水灾、旱灾、风灾、冰雹灾等自然灾害不断，严重影响了人民生活。为做好灾民的救助工作，中国建立了针对突发性自然灾害的社会救助制度。在中国，各级政府每年都在财政预算中安排救灾支出，用于安置和救济灾民。1996年至2001年，全国各级财政救灾支出达到212.6亿元，向3.9亿人次的灾民提供粮食、衣被等救助。灾害救助制度有力地保障了灾区人民的基本生活。
    China frequently suffers the ravages of natural disasters, such as floods, droughts, windstorms and hailstorms, which have adversely affected people's lives. The Chinese government has set up a special social relief system to relieve the sufferings of victims of unexpected natural calamities. Every year, relief funds are allocated from government budgets at central and local levels for this purpose. From 1996 to 2001, such expenditures reached 21.26 billion yuan-worth nationwide, providing food, clothing and quilts for 390 million disaster victims. This disaster relief system has gone a long way toward guaranteeing the basic livelihood of the people in the disaster-stricken areas.
社会互助制度
    The Social Mutual Help System
　　邻里互助是中华民族的优良传统。2000年颁布的《中华人民共和国社会公益捐赠法》，对社会捐赠活动的经常化、制度化进行了立法规范和鼓励。2001年民政部门接收的社会捐赠(含捐赠物资折款)金额为15.9亿元。中国政府还积极倡导机关、企事业单位、社会团体有组织地帮助和扶持贫困户脱贫致富。基层政府通过兴办社区服务业，为贫困对象提供照顾和服务。自1994年起，全国各级工会组织每年开展对困难职工家庭的“送温暖”活动。几年来，共筹集慰问款104.4亿元，走访慰问了3975万户次困难职工、劳动模范、离退休职工和伤病残职工家庭。
    Mutual help among neighbors is one of the Chinese nation's fine traditions. Issued in 2000, the Law of the People's Republic of China on Public Welfare Donations institutionalizes and encourages regular donations for social welfare. In 2001, civil affairs departments received 1.59 billion yuan of donations from the general public (including goods converted into money). The Chinese government also encourages enterprises, institutions and mass organizations to organize efforts to help the poor shake off poverty and get rich. Governments at the grassroots levels also operate community services for the poor and needy. Since 1994, trade unions at all levels have organized "heart-warming activities" every year to offer help to badly-off families. Over the past few years, a total of 10.44 billion yuan for this purpose have been raised and sympathy visits paid to families of 39.75 million poverty-stricken employees, model workers, retirees, and injured, sick or disabled employees.
二十一世纪初期的发展
     Development in the Early Period of the 21st Century
中国于2001年开始执行国民经济和社会发展第十个五年(2001—2005)计划，劳动和社会保障事业的发展进入了新阶段。新世纪初期，发展中国劳动和社会保障事业既存在需要解决的问题，又面临新的发展机遇。改革开放和现代化建设的全面推进，为解决就业和社会保障问题创造了有利条件；国民经济的进一步发展和经济实力的增强，为扩大就业和发展社会保障事业提供了较为坚实的物质基础；已初步建立的市场导向的就业机制和社会保障体系，为进一步推动劳动和社会保障事业的发展奠定了良好基础。同时，中国政府也清醒地看到，在今后较长一个时期，城乡就业矛盾依然突出，结构性失业更加严峻，劳动关系趋于复杂化，人口老龄化和失业人员的增加对社会保障的压力将进一步增强，发展农村社会保障事业任重道远。
With the implementation of the Tenth Five-Year Plan, for National Economic and Social Development (2001-2005) in 2001, China's labor and social security buildup has entered a new phase of development. During the early stage of the new century, these efforts face both problems to be solved and new opportunities for development. The overall progress of the reform and opening-up and modernization drive has created favorable conditions for solving the problems of employment and social security. The further growth of the national economy and the increase of economic strength have provided a firm material foundation for the enlargement of employment and the improvement of social security. The market-oriented employment mechanism and social security system now basically in place across China have already laid a good foundation for further promotion of the labor and social security undertakings. At the same time, the Chinese government is also fully aware that the employment problem in both the rural and urban areas will remain sharp, and structural unemployment will become more serious for a long time to come. Labor relations are expected to become more complicated, the aging of the population and the increase of unemployment will put more pressure on social security, and promotion of social security in rural areas will still have a long way to go.
    
目标任务
    Targets and Tasks
　　二十一世纪初期，中国劳动和社会保障事业的发展目标是：基本建立起适应中国生产力发展水平、符合社会主义市场经济要求的比较完善的劳动和社会保障制度，使广大劳动者得到较为充分的就业和基本的社会保障，维护劳动者和用人单位的合法权益，提高城乡居民的物质和文化生活水平，促进经济发展和社会稳定。主要任务是：不断提高劳动者素质和改善就业结构，基本形成市场导向的就业机制，努力促进就业增长，规范和完善失业率统计，城镇登记失业率控制在5%以内；积极协调劳动关系，保持劳动关系的和谐稳定；完善收入分配宏观调控体系，保持合理的收入分配关系，城镇居民人均可支配收入和农村居民人均纯收入年均增长5%左右；加快城镇社会保障制度建设，改进筹资方式和运营机制，推进社会保障管理和服务的社会化；在农村，以多种形式的农民养老保障和健康保障为先导，积极探索与社会主义市场经济体制和经济发展水平相适应的基本保障体系，建立帮助弱势群体生活和工作的制度。
    The targets for labor and social security development in the early part of this century are as follows: initially forming a comparatively complete labor and social security system corresponding to the development level of China's productive forces and meeting the requirements of the socialist market economy; ensuring well-nigh full employment and basic social security for the majority of workers; safeguarding the legal rights and interests of both employees and employers; enhancing the material and cultural wellbeing of rural and urban residents; and promoting economic development and social stability. The main tasks are to gradually improve the quality of workers and the employment structure, initially form a market-oriented employment mechanism, strive to promote employment, standardize and improve the statistics on unemployment rate, and control the registered rural and urban unemployment rate to within 5 percent; actively adjust labor relations and keep them harmonious and stable; improve the macro regulation and control system of income distribution, work out a rational income distribution relationship, and achieve an approximately 5 percent annual increase in both the per capita disposable income of urban residents and the net per capita income of rural residents; speed up the development of the urban social security system, improve the methods and operating mechanism of fund raising, and promote the socialization of social security management and services; with farmers' old-age security and health security of multiple forms as the guide, actively explore in rural areas a basic security system suited to the socialist market economy system and the country's economic development level and set up a system to help the weak group in society to take care of their own life and work.
政策措施
    Policies and Measures
实行积极的促进就业政策,千方百计扩大就业规模。继续保持经济较快增长，扩大国内需求，最大限度地创造新的就业机会，增加就业总量。改善劳动力就业结构，大力发展劳动密集型产业和企业，将第三产业、中小企业和非公有制经济作为扩大就业的主要渠道。进一步落实优惠政策，促进下岗失业人员再就业。
Carry out an active policy for promoting employment and do everything possible to enlarge the scale of employment. Rapid economic growth shall be maintained, domestic demands shall be expanded, and new employment opportunities created to the full, so as to increase total employment. The employment structure for labor force should be improved, and great efforts made to develop labor-intensive industries and enterprises. Tertiary industry, small and medium-sized enterprises and the non-public sectors of the economy shall be taken as the main channels for the enlargement of employment. Preferential policies shall be further carried out so as to help laid-off and jobless people to find reemployment.
建立统一、规范的劳动力市场，统筹城乡就业，完善就业服务体系。深化劳动人事和户籍管理制度改革，引导劳动力在城乡之间、地区之间的有序流动，促进农业剩余劳动力转移。改善公共职业介绍机构的服务，推动民营职业介绍机构的健康发展。
Establish a unified and standardized labor market, make a unified plan for rural and urban employment, and ameliorate the employment service system. The reform of the labor personnel system and the household registration system shall be deepened, and efforts made to guide the orderly flow of the labor force between urban and rural areas or between regions so as to promote the transfer of surplus agricultural labor. The service of public job agencies shall be improved and community-run job agencies encouraged to develop along healthy lines.
全面提高劳动者素质，实行灵活的就业形式。推行劳动预备制度和就业准入制度，强化职业教育、继续教育和再就业培训，推行职业资格证书制度。重视对农村劳动力的职业技术培训，逐步形成完善的农村职业培训体系。采取灵活的就业形式，提倡自主就业。
Improve the quality of workers in an all-round way and adopt flexible forms of employment. The labor reserve system and employment permit system shall be carried out. Vocational education, continuing education and reemployment training shall be strengthened, and the professional qualification certification system enforced. More attention shall be paid to job skill training for rural workers, and a sound job training system established and improved in rural areas step by step. Flexible forms of employment shall be adopted, and finding employment on one's own encouraged.
巩固和完善劳动合同制度，大力推进集体合同制度，促进劳动关系三方协调机制的建立。积极开展国家基本劳动标准的制订修订工作，完善适合中国国情的劳动标准体系。进一步完善劳动争议处理制度，不断提高预防和处理劳动争议的综合能力。
Consolidate and improve the labor contract system, make great efforts to carry forward the group contract system and promote the establishment of a tripartite coordination mechanism for labor relations. Active efforts shall be made to formulate and revise the state's basic labor standards, and a labor standard system suitable to China's actual conditions be perfected. The system of handling labor disputes shall be further improved, gradually enhancing the comprehensive ability to prevent and handle labor disputes.
推进工资收入分配制度改革，建立收入分配的激励和约束机制。健全最低工资制度，全面推行工资指导线和劳动力市场工资指导价位制度。继续试行工资集体协商制度，规范工资支付行为，保障职工的劳动报酬权益。
Promote the reform of the wage and income distribution system and establish an incentive and restraining mechanism for income distribution. The minimum wage system shall be improved and the wage guidelines and the guidance price level system for the labor market be enforced across-the-board. Efforts shall be made to continue the experiments in the collective wage consultation system, standardize the payment of wages and guarantee the legal rights and interests of employees with respect to their work remuneration.
深化社会保障体制改革，加快社会保障体系建设，积极进行完善社会保障体系试点。建立可靠稳定的社会保障基金筹资机制，调整财政支出结构，增加必要投入，充实保障基金，合理调整缴费率和替代水平，提高社会保障基金运营效率和投资收益率。健全社会保障宏观调控和监督体制，提高管理水平和工作效率，促进社会保障体系稳定、健康和有序运行。
Deepen the reform of the social security system, speed up the building of the social security system and actively implement the pilot program for its improvement. For this, we need to establish a reliable and stable social security fund-raising mechanism, restructure financial expenditure, increase necessary input and the amount of social security funds, and rationally adjust the payment rate and substitution level, and improve the operational efficiency of social security funds and the efficiency rate of investment. The social security macro-regulation and supervision system shall be bettered and its management level and efficiency raised, so as to ensure the stable, healthy and orderly operation of the social security system.
健全基本养老保险和基本医疗保险制度，鼓励有条件的用人单位为职工建立企业年金和补充医疗保险。进一步完善失业保险制度，将国有企业下岗职工基本生活保障制度纳入失业保险。加快推进工伤保险与生育保险制度建设。完善机关事业单位职工基本养老保险制度。规范城市居民最低生活保障制度。加快社区建设，推进社会保障社会化。探索多种保障形式，推进农村基本保障体系建设。完善社会救济、社会互助、优抚安置和社会福利政策，维护妇女、未成年人、老年人和残疾人的合法权益。
Improve the basic old-age insurance and basic medical insurance systems and encourage employing units, where conditions are favorable, to set up annuity and supplementary medical insurance programs for their employees. Further steps shall be taken to improve the unemployment insurance system and make the basic livelihood guarantee system for laid-off personnel from state-owned enterprises part of the unemployment insurance scheme. Development of the industrial injury and childbirth insurance systems shall be accelerated. The basic old-age pension insurance system for employees of state organs and institutions shall be improved. The system for ensuring a minimum standard of living for urban residents shall be standardized. We shall accelerate community building and promote the socialization of social security. We shall explore diverse forms of security and push forward the building of the basic security system in the rural areas. We need to improve our policies concerning social relief, social mutual aid, the special care and placement system and social welfare, and safeguard the legal rights and interests of women, minors, the elderly and the handicapped.
建立行政监督、社会监督和机构内部控制相结合的社会保障基金监管体系。在建立和完善社会保障制度的同时，探索投资管理的途径，根据不同保障项目资金的管理原则，建立与基金管理体制相配套的基金监督管理制度，努力实现基金保值增值，化解社会保障基金的运行风险，维护社会的安全与稳定。
Establish a supervision and management system concerning social security funds through a combination of administrative supervision, social supervision and internal institutional control. While establishing and improving the social security system, we shall explore the right path for investment management and establish a fund supervision and management system coordinative with the fund management system in accordance with the fund management principles of different security projects. We shall work hard to guarantee or increase the value of the social security funds and resolve the operational risks of the security funds, so as to safeguard social safety and stability.
加快劳动和社会保障法制建设，完善劳动和社会保障监察制度，不断提高监察执法人员的综合素质，开展多种形式的监察活动，推进劳动保障监察执法与社会各方面实行法律监督的有机结合。加强劳动保障管理信息系统建设和科学研究成果推广工作，提高劳动和社会保障管理的科学化、规范化、法制化、信息化水平。继续积极参与国际劳动和社会保障领域的活动，广泛开展对外合作与交流，进一步发挥中国在国际劳工事务中的促进作用，适应加入世界贸易组织的新形势，努力推动劳动和社会保障事业不断取得新的发展。
Press ahead with the legal system building in the labor and social security fields, improve the labor and social security supervision system, steadily enhance the overall quality of supervision and law-enforcement personnel, carry out supervision activities of diverse forms, and push forward the organic integration of labor security supervision and law-enforcement departments with all social sectors in implementing legal supervision. We shall strengthen the building of the labor security management information system and the popularization of the scientific findings in this aspect so as to improve the scientific, standardized, institutionalized and IT management of the labor and social security undertakings. China will continue to actively participate in international activities in the fields of labor and social security, and expand cooperation and exchange with other countries, so as to continue to play its promotional role in international labor affairs. We will adapt ourselves to the new situation arising from our WTO entry, and work hard consistently to carry our labor and social security cause further forward.

钓鱼岛是中国的固有领土
Diaoyu Dao, an Inherent Territory of China
 
中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室
State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China
 
2012年9月
September 2012
 
目录
Contents
 
前言
Foreword
 
钓鱼岛是中国的固有领土
Diaoyu Dao is China’s Inherent Territory
 
日本窃取钓鱼岛
 Japan Grabbed Diaoyu Dao from China
 
美日对钓鱼岛私相授受非法无效
 Backroom Deals Between the United States and Japan Concerning Diaoyu Dao are Illegal and Invalid
 
日本主张钓鱼岛主权毫无依据
 Japan’s Claim of Sovereignty over Diaoyu Dao is Totally Unfounded
 
中国为维护钓鱼岛主权进行坚决斗争
 China has Taken Resolute Measures to Safeguard its Sovereignty over Diaoyu Dao
 
结束语
Conclusion
 
前言
Foreword
 
钓鱼岛及其附属岛屿是中国领土不可分割的一部分。无论从历史、地理还是从法理的角度来看，钓鱼岛都是中国的固有领土，中国对其拥有无可争辩的主权。
 
Diaoyu Dao and its affiliated islands are an inseparable part of the Chinese territory. Diaoyu Dao is China’s inherent territory in all historical, geographical and legal terms, and China enjoys indisputable sovereignty over Diaoyu Dao.
 
日本在1895年利用甲午战争窃取钓鱼岛是非法无效的。第二次世界大战后，根据《开罗宣言》和《波茨坦公告》等国际法律文件，钓鱼岛回归中国。无论日本对钓鱼岛采取任何单方面举措，都不能改变钓鱼岛属于中国的事实。长期以来，日本在钓鱼岛问题上不时制造事端。2012年9月10日，日本政府宣布“购买”钓鱼岛及附属的南小岛、北小岛，实施所谓“国有化”。这是对中国领土主权的严重侵犯，是对历史事实和国际法理的严重践踏。
 
Japan’s occupation of Diaoyu Dao during the Sino-Japanese War in 1895 is illegal and invalid. After World War II, Diaoyu Dao was returned to China in accordance with such international legal documents as the Cairo Declaration and thePotsdam Proclamation. No matter what unilateral step Japan takes over Diaoyu Dao, it will not change the fact that Diaoyu Dao belongs to China. For quite some time, Japan has repeatedly stirred up troubles on the issue of Diaoyu Dao. On September 10, 2012, the Japanese government announced the “purchase” of Diaoyu Dao and its affiliated Nanxiao Dao and Beixiao Dao and the implementation of the so-called “nationalization”. This is a move that grossly violates China’s territorial sovereignty and seriously tramples on historical facts and international jurisprudence.
 
中国坚决反对和遏制日本采取任何方式侵犯中国对钓鱼岛的主权。中国在钓鱼岛问题上的立场是明确的、一贯的，维护国家主权和领土完整的意志坚定不移，捍卫世界反法西斯战争胜利成果的决心毫不动摇。
 
China is firmly opposed to Japan’s violation of China’s sovereignty over Diaoyu Dao in whatever form and has taken resolute measures to curb any such act. China’s position on the issue of Diaoyu Dao is clear-cut and consistent. China’s will to defend national sovereignty and territorial integrity is firm and its resolve to uphold the outcomes of the World Anti-Fascist War will not be shaken by any force.
钓鱼岛是中国的固有领土
Diaoyu Dao is China’s Inherent Territory
 
钓鱼岛及其附属岛屿位于中国台湾岛的东北部，是台湾的附属岛屿，分布在东经123°20′-124°40′，北纬25°40′-26°00′之间的海域，由钓鱼岛、黄尾屿、赤尾屿、南小岛、北小岛、南屿、北屿、飞屿等岛礁组成，总面积约5.69平方千米。钓鱼岛位于该海域的最西端，面积约3.91平方千米，是该海域面积最大的岛屿，主峰海拔362米。黄尾屿位于钓鱼岛东北约27千米，面积约0.91平方千米，是该海域的第二大岛，最高海拔117米。赤尾屿位于钓鱼岛东北约110千米，是该海域最东端的岛屿，面积约0.065平方千米，最高海拔75米。
 
Diaoyu Dao and its affiliated islands, which consist of Diaoyu Dao, Huangwei Yu, Chiwei Yu, Nanxiao Dao, Beixiao Dao, Nan Yu, Bei Yu, Fei Yu and other islands and reefs, are located to the northeast of China’s Taiwan Island, in the waters between 123o20’-124o40’E (East Longitude) and 25o40’-26o00’N (North Latitude), and are affiliated to the Taiwan Island. The total landmass of these islands is approximately 5.69 square kilometers. Diaoyu Dao, situated in the western tip of the area, covers a landmass of about 3.91 square kilometers and is the largest island in the area. The highest peak on the island stands 362 meters above the sea level. Huangwei Yu, which is located about 27 kilometers to the northeast of Diaoyu Dao, is the second largest island in the area, with a total landmass of about 0.91 square kilometers and a highest elevation of 117 meters. Chiwei Yu, situated about 110 kilometers to the northeast of Diaoyu Dao, is the easternmost island in the area. It covers a landmass of approximately 0.065 square kilometers and stands 75 meters above the sea level at its peak.
 
中国最先发现、命名和利用钓鱼岛
Diaoyu Dao was first discovered, named and exploited by China
 
中国古代先民在经营海洋和从事海上渔业的实践中，最早发现钓鱼岛并予以命名。在中国古代文献中，钓鱼岛又称钓鱼屿、钓鱼台。目前所见最早记载钓鱼岛、赤尾屿等地名的史籍，是成书于1403年（明永乐元年）的《顺风相送》。这表明，早在十四、十五世纪中国就已经发现并命名了钓鱼岛。
 
Ancient ancestors in China first discovered and named Diaoyu Dao through their production and fishery activities on the sea. In China’s historical literatures, Diaoyu Dao is also called Diaoyu Yu or Diaoyu Tai. The earliest historical record of the names of Diaoyu Dao, Chiwei Yu and other places can be found in the book Voyage with a Tail Wind (Shun Feng Xiang Song) published in 1403 (the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongle of the Ming Dynasty). It shows that China had already discovered and named Diaoyu Dao by the 14th and 15th centuries.
 
1372年（明洪武五年），琉球国王向明朝朝贡，明太祖遣使前往琉球。至1866年（清同治五年）近500年间，明清两代朝廷先后24次派遣使臣前往琉球王国册封，钓鱼岛是册封使前往琉球的途经之地，有关钓鱼岛的记载大量出现在中国使臣撰写的报告中。如，明朝册封使陈侃所著《使琉球录》（1534年）明确记载“过钓鱼屿，过黄毛屿，过赤屿，……见古米山，乃属琉球者”。明朝册封使郭汝霖所著《使琉球录》（1562年）记载，“赤屿者，界琉球地方山也”。清朝册封副使徐葆光所著《中山传信录》（1719年）明确记载，从福建到琉球，经花瓶屿、彭佳屿、钓鱼岛、黄尾屿、赤尾屿，“取姑米山（琉球西南方界上镇山）、马齿岛，入琉球那霸港”。
 
In 1372 (the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Hongwu of the Ming Dynasty), the King of Ryukyu started paying tribute to the imperial court of the Ming Dynasty. In return, Emperor Hongwu (the first emperor of the Ming Dynasty) sent imperial envoys to Ryukyu. In the following five centuries until 1866 (the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Tongzhi of the Qing Dynasty), the imperial courts of the Ming and Qing Dynasties sent imperial envoys to Ryukyu 24 times to confer titles on the Ryukyu King, and Diaoyu Dao was exactly located on their route to Ryukyu. Ample volume of records about Diaoyu Dao could be found in the reports written by Chinese imperial envoys at the time. For example, the Records of the Imperial Title-conferring Envoys to Ryukyu (Shi Liu Qiu Lu) written in 1534 by Chen Kan, an imperial title-conferring envoy from the Ming court, clearly stated that “the ship has passed Diaoyu Dao, Huangmao Yu, Chi Yu... Then Gumi Mountain comes into sight, that is where the land of Ryukyu begins.” The Shi Liu Qiu Lu of another imperial envoy of the Ming Dynasty, Guo Rulin, in 1562 also stated that “Chi Yu is the mountain that marks the boundary of Ryukyu”. In 1719, Xu Baoguang, a deputy title-conferring envoy to Ryukyu in the Qing Dynasty, clearly recorded in his book Records of Messages from Chong-shan(Zhong Shan Chuan Xin Lu) that the voyage from Fujian to Ryukyu passed Huaping Yu, Pengjia Yu, Diaoyu Dao, Huangwei Yu, Chiwei Yu and reached Naba (Naha) port of Ryukyu via Gumi Mountain (the mountain guarding the southwest border of Ryukyu) and Machi Island.
 
1650年，琉球国相向象贤监修的琉球国第一部正史《中山世鉴》记载，古米山（亦称姑米山，今久米岛）是琉球的领土，而赤屿（今赤尾屿）及其以西则非琉球领土。1708年，琉球学者、紫金大夫程顺则所著《指南广义》记载，姑米山为“琉球西南界上之镇山”。
 
In 1650, the Annals of Chong-shan (Zhong Shan Shi Jian), the first official historical record of the Ryukyu Kingdom drafted under the supervision of Ryukyu’s prime minister Xiang Xiangxian (Kozoken), confirmed that Gumi Mountain (also called Gumi Mountain, known as Kume Island today) is part of Ryukyu’s territory, while Chi Yu (known as Chiwei Yu today) and the areas to its west are not Ryukyu’s territory. In 1708, Cheng Shunze (Tei Junsoku), a noted scholar and the Grand Master with the Purple-Golden Ribbon (Zi Jin Da Fu) of Ryukyu, recorded in his book A General Guide (Zhi Nan Guang Yi) that “Gumi Mountain is the mountain guarding the southwest border of Ryukyu”.
 
以上史料清楚记载着钓鱼岛、赤尾屿属于中国，久米岛属于琉球，分界线在赤尾屿和久米岛之间的黑水沟（今冲绳海槽）。明朝册封副使谢杰所著《琉球录撮要补遗》（1579年）记载，“去由沧水入黑水，归由黑水入沧水”。明朝册封使夏子阳所著《使琉球录》（1606年）记载，“水离黑入沧，必是中国之界”。清朝册封使汪辑所著《使琉球杂录》（1683年）记载，赤屿之外的“黑水沟”即是“中外之界”。清朝册封副使周煌所著《琉球国志略》（1756年）记载，琉球“海面西距黑水沟，与闽海界”。
 
These historical accounts clearly demonstrate that Diaoyu Dao and Chiwei Yu belong to China and Kume Island belongs to Ryukyu, and that the separating line lies in Hei Shui Gou (today’s Okinawa Trough) between Chiwei Yu and Kume Island. In 1579, Xie Jie, a deputy imperial title-conferring envoy of the Ming Dynasty, recorded in his book, Addendum to Summarized Record of Ryukyu (Liu Qiu Lu Cuo Yao Bu Yi) that he entered Ryukyu from Cang Shui to Hei Shui, and returned to China from Hei Shui to Cang Shui. Xia Ziyang, another imperial envoy of the Ming court, wrote in 1606 that “when the water flows from Hei Shui back to Cang Shui, it enters the Chinese territory.” Miscellaneous Records of a Mission to Ryukyu(Shi Liu Qiu Za Lu), a book written in 1683 by Wang Ji, an imperial envoy of the Qing Dynasty, stated that “Hei Shui Gou”, situated outside Chi Yu, is the “boundary between China and foreign land”. In 1756, Zhou Huang, a deputy imperial envoy of the Qing Dynasty, recorded in his book, the Annals of Ryukyu (Liu Qiu Guo Zhi Lue), that Ryukyu “is separated from the waters of Fujian by Hei Shui Gou to the west”.
 
钓鱼岛海域是中国的传统渔场，中国渔民世世代代在该海域从事渔业生产活动。钓鱼岛作为航海标志，在历史上被中国东南沿海民众广泛利用。
 
The waters surrounding Diaoyu Dao are traditionally Chinese fishing ground. Chinese fishermen have, for generations, engaged in fishery activities in these waters. In the past, Diaoyu Dao was used as a navigation marker by the Chinese people living on the southeast coast.
 
中国对钓鱼岛实行了长期管辖
Diaoyu Dao had long been under China’s jurisdiction
 
早在明朝初期，为防御东南沿海的倭寇，中国就将钓鱼岛列入防区。1561年（明嘉靖四十年），明朝驻防东南沿海的最高将领胡宗宪主持、郑若曾编纂的《筹海图编》一书，明确将钓鱼岛等岛屿编入“沿海山沙图”，纳入明朝的海防范围内。1605年（明万历三十三年）徐必达等人绘制的《乾坤一统海防全图》及1621年（明天启元年）茅元仪绘制的中国海防图《武备志?海防二?福建沿海山沙图》，也将钓鱼岛等岛屿划入中国海疆之内。
 
In the early years of the Ming Dynasty, China placed Diaoyu Dao under its coastal defense to guard against the invasion of Japanese pirates along its southeast coast. In 1561 (the 40th year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing of the Ming Dynasty), An Illustrated Compendium on Maritime Security (Chou Hai Tu Bian) compiled by Zheng Ruozeng under the auspices of Hu Zongxian, the supreme commander of the southeast coastal defense of the Ming court, included the Diaoyu Dao Islands on the “Map of Coastal Mountains and Sands” (Yan Hai Shan Sha Tu) and incorporated them into the jurisdiction of the coastal defense of the Ming court. The Complete Map of Unified Maritime Territory for Coastal Defense (Qian Kun Yi Tong Hai Fang Quan Tu), drawn up by Xu Bida and others in 1605 (the 33rd year of the reign of Emperor Wanli of the Ming Dynasty) and the Treatise on Military Preparations. Coastal Defense  Map of Fujian’s Coastal Mountains and Sands (Wu Bei Zhi.Hai Fang Er.Fu Jian Yan Hai Shan Sha Tu), drawn up by Mao Yuanyi in 1621 (the first year of the reign of Emperor Tianqi of the Ming Dynasty), also included the Diaoyu Dao Islands as part of China’s maritime territory.
 
清朝不仅沿袭了明朝的做法，继续将钓鱼岛等岛屿列入中国海防范围内，而且明确将其置于台湾地方政府的行政管辖之下。清代《台海使槎录》、《台湾府志》等官方文献详细记载了对钓鱼岛的管辖情况。1871年（清同治十年）刊印的陈寿祺等编纂的《重纂福建通志》卷八十六将钓鱼岛列入海防冲要，隶属台湾府噶玛兰厅（今台湾省宜兰县）管辖。
 
The Qing court not only incorporated the Diaoyu Dao Islands into the scope of China’s coastal defense as the Ming court did, but also clearly placed the islands under the jurisdiction of the local government of Taiwan. Official documents of the Qing court, such as A Tour of Duty in the Taiwan Strait (Tai Hai Shi Cha Lu) and Annals of Taiwan Prefecture (Tai Wan Fu Zhi) all gave detailed accounts concerning China’s administration over Diaoyu Dao. Volume 86 of Recompiled General Annals of Fujian (Chong Zuan Fu Jian Tong Zhi), a book compiled by Chen Shouqi and others in 1871 (the tenth year of the reign of Emperor Tongzhi of the Qing Dynasty), included Diaoyu Dao as a strategic location for coastal defense and placed the islands under the jurisdiction of Gamalan, Taiwan (known as Yilan County today).
 
中外地图标绘钓鱼岛属于中国
Chinese and foreign maps show that Diaoyu Dao belongs to China
 
1579年（明万历七年）明朝册封使萧崇业所著《使琉球录》中的“琉球过海图”、1629年（明崇祯二年）茅瑞徵撰写的《皇明象胥录》、1767年（清乾隆三十二年）绘制的《坤舆全图》、1863年（清同治二年）刊行的《皇朝中外一统舆图》等，都将钓鱼岛列入中国版图。
 
The Roadmap to Ryukyu (Liu Qiu Guo Hai Tu) in the Shi Liu Qiu Lu written by imperial title-conferring envoy Xiao Chongye in 1579 (the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Wanli of the Ming Dynasty), the Record of the Interpreters of August Ming (Huang Ming Xiang Xu Lu) written by Mao Ruizheng in 1629 (the second year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen of the Ming Dynasty), the Great Universal Geographic Map (Kun Yu Quan Tu) created in 1767 (the 32nd year of the reign of Emperor Qianlong of the Qing Dynasty), and the Atlas of the Great Qing Dynasty (Huang Chao Zhong Wai Yi Tong Yu Tu) published in 1863 (the second year of the reign of Emperor Tongzhi of the Qing Dynasty) all marked Diaoyu Dao as China’s territory.
 
日本最早记载钓鱼岛的文献为1785年林子平所著《三国通览图说》的附图“琉球三省并三十六岛之图”，该图将钓鱼岛列在琉球三十六岛之外，并与中国大陆绘成同色，意指钓鱼岛为中国领土的一部分。
 
The book Illustrated Outline of the Three Countries written by Hayashi Shihei in 1785 was the earliest Japanese literature to mention Diaoyu Dao. The Map of the Three Provinces and 36 Islands of Ryukyu in the book put Diaoyu Dao as being apart from the 36 islands of Ryukyu and colored it the same as the mainland of China, indicating that Diaoyu Dao was part of China’s territory.
 
1809年法国地理学家皮耶?拉比等绘《东中国海沿岸各国图》，将钓鱼岛、黄尾屿、赤尾屿绘成与台湾岛相同的颜色。1811年英国出版的《最新中国地图》、1859年美国出版的《柯顿的中国》、1877年英国海军编制的《中国东海沿海自香港至辽东湾海图》等地图，都将钓鱼岛列入中国版图。
 
The Map of East China Sea Littoral States created by the French cartographer Pierre Lapie and others in 1809 colored Diaoyu Dao, Huangwei Yu, Chiwei Yu and the Taiwan Island as the same. Maps such as A New Map of China from the Latest Authorities published in Britain in 1811, Colton’s China published in the United States in 1859, and A Map of China’s East Coast: Hongkong to Gulf of Liao-Tung compiled by the British Navy in 1877 all marked Diaoyu Dao as part of China’s territory.


日本窃取钓鱼岛
 Japan Grabbed Diaoyu Dao from China
 
日本在明治维新以后加快对外侵略扩张。1879年，日本吞并琉球并改称冲绳县。此后不久，日本便密谋侵占钓鱼岛，并于甲午战争末期将钓鱼岛秘密“编入”版图。随后，日本又迫使中国签订不平等的《马关条约》，割让台湾全岛及包括钓鱼岛在内的所有附属各岛屿。
 
Japan accelerated its invasion and external expansion after the Meiji Restoration. Japan seized Ryukyu in 1879 and changed its name to Okinawa Prefecture. Soon after that, Japan began to act covertly to invade and occupy Diaoyu Dao and secretly “included” Diaoyu Dao in its territory at the end of the Sino-Japanese War of 1894-1895. Japan then forced China to sign the unequal Treaty of Shimonoseki and cede to Japan the island of Formosa (Taiwan), together with Diaoyu Dao and all other islands appertaining or belonging to the said island of Formosa.
 
日本密谋窃取钓鱼岛
Japan’s covert moves to seize Diaoyu Dao
 
1884年，有日本人声称首次登上钓鱼岛，发现该岛为“无人岛”。日本政府随即对钓鱼岛开展秘密调查，并试图侵占。日本上述图谋引起中国的警觉。1885年9月6日（清光绪十一年七月二十八日）《申报》登载消息：“台湾东北边之海岛，近有日本人悬日旗于其上，大有占据之势。”由于顾忌中国的反应，日本政府未敢轻举妄动。
 
In 1884, a Japanese man claimed that he first landed on Diaoyu Dao and found the island to be uninhabited. The Japanese government then dispatched secret facts-finding missions to Diaoyu Dao and attempted to invade and occupy the island. The above-mentioned plots by Japan triggered China’s alert. On September 6, 1885 (the 28th day of the 7th month in the 11th year of the reign of Emperor Guangxu of the Qing Dynasty), the Chinese newspaper Shen-pao (Shanghai News) reported: “Recently, Japanese flags have been seen on the islands northeast to Taiwan, revealing Japan’s intention to occupy these islands.” But the Japanese government did not dare to take any further action for fear of reaction from China.
 
1885年9月22日冲绳县令在对钓鱼岛进行秘密调查后向内务卿山县有朋密报称，这些无人岛“与《中山传信录》记载的钓鱼台、黄尾屿和赤尾屿应属同一岛屿”，已为清朝册封使船所详悉，并赋以名称，作为赴琉球的航海标识，因此对是否应建立国家标桩心存疑虑，请求给予指示。同年10月9日，内务卿山县有朋致函外务卿井上馨征求意见。10月21日，井上馨复函山县有朋认为，“此刻若有公然建立国标等举措，必遭清国疑忌，故当前宜仅限于实地调查及详细报告其港湾形状、有无可待日后开发之土地物产等，而建国标及着手开发等，可待他日见机而作”。井上馨还特意强调，“此次调查之事恐均不刊载官报及报纸为宜”。因此，日本政府没有同意冲绳县建立国家标桩的请求。
 
After the secret facts-finding missions to Diaoyu Dao, the governor of Okinawa Prefecture sent a report in secrecy to the Minister of Internal Affairs Yamagata Aritomo on September 22, 1885, saying that these uninhabited islands were, in fact, the same Diaoyu Tai, Huangwei Yu and Chiwe Yu that were recorded in the Records of Messages from Chong-shan (Zhong Shan Chuan Xin Lu) and known well to imperial title-conferring envoys of the Qing court on their voyages to Ryukyu, and that he had doubts as to whether or not sovereignty markers should be set up and therefore asked for instruction. The Minister of Internal Affairs Yamagata Aritomo solicited opinion from the Foreign Minister Inoue Kaoru on October 9. Inoue Kaoru replied in a letter to Yamagata Aritomo on October 21, “At present, any open moves such as placing sovereignty markers are bound to alert the Qing imperial court. Therefore, it is advisable not to go beyond field surveys and detailed reports on the shapes of the bays, land and other resources for future development. In the meantime, we will wait for a better time to engage in such activities as putting up sovereignty markers and embarking on development on the islands.” Inoue Kaoru also made a special emphasis that “it is inappropriate to publicize the missions on official gazette or newspapers.” As a result, the Japanese government did not approve of the request of Okinawa Prefecture to set up sovereignty markers.
 
1890年1月13日，冲绳县知事又请示内务大臣，称钓鱼岛等岛屿“为无人岛，迄今尚未确定其管辖”，“请求将其划归本县管辖之八重山官署所辖”。1893年11月2日，冲绳县知事再次申请建立国标以划入版图。日本政府仍未答复。甲午战争前两个月，即1894年5月12日，冲绳县秘密调查钓鱼岛的最终结论是：“自明治十八年（1885年）派县警察对该岛进行勘察以来，未再开展进一步调查，故难提供更确切报告。……此外，没有关于该岛之旧时记录文书以及显示属我国领有的文字或口头传说的证据。”
 
The governor of Okinawa Prefecture submitted the matter for approval to the Minister of Internal Affairs once again on January 13, 1890, saying that Diaoyu Dao and other “above-mentioned uninhabited islands have remained under no specific jurisdiction”, and that he “intends to place them under the jurisdiction of the Office of Yaeyama Islands.” On November 2, 1893, the governor of Okinawa Prefecture applied once again for setting up sovereignty markers to incorporate the islands into Japan’s territory. The Japanese government did not respond. On May 12, 1894, two months before the Sino-Japanese War, the secret facts-finding missions to Diaoyu Dao by Okinawa Prefecture came to a final conclusion, “Ever since the prefecture police surveyed the island in 1885 (the 18th year of the Meiji period), there have been no subsequent investigations. As a result, it is difficult to provide any specific reports on it... In addition, there exist no old records related to the said island or folklore and legends demonstrating that the island belongs to our country.”
 
日本外务省编纂的《日本外交文书》明确记载了日本企图窃取钓鱼岛的经过，相关文件清楚地显示，当时日本政府虽然觊觎钓鱼岛，但完全清楚这些岛屿属于中国，不敢轻举妄动。
 
Japan’s attempts to occupy Diaoyu Dao were clearly recorded in Japan Diplomatic Documents compiled by the Japanese Foreign Ministry. Relevant documents evidently show that the Japanese government intended to occupy Diaoyu Dao, but refrained from acting impetuously as it was fully aware of China’s sovereignty over these islands.
 
1894年7月，日本发动甲午战争。同年11月底，日本军队占领中国旅顺口，清朝败局已定。在此背景下，12月27日，日本内务大臣野村靖致函外务大臣陆奥宗光，认为“今昔形势已殊”，要求将在钓鱼岛建立国标、纳入版图事提交内阁会议决定。1895年1月11日，陆奥宗光回函表示支持。同年1月14日，日本内阁秘密通过决议，将钓鱼岛“编入”冲绳县管辖。
 
Japan waged the Sino-Japanese War in July 1894. Towards the end of November 1894, Japanese forces seized the Chinese port of Lushun (then known as Port Arthur), virtually securing defeat of the Qing court. Against such backdrop, the Japanese Minister of Internal Affairs Yasushi Nomura wrote to Foreign Minister Mutsu Munemitsu on December 27 that the “circumstances have now changed”, and called for a decision by the cabinet on the issue of setting up sovereignty markers in Diaoyu Dao and incorporating the island into Japan’s territory. Mutsu Munemitsu expressed his support for the proposal in his reply to Yasushi Nomura on January 11, 1895. The Japanese cabinet secretly passed a resolution on January 14 to “place” Diaoyu Dao under the jurisdiction of Okinawa Prefecture.
 
日本官方文件显示，日本从1885年开始调查钓鱼岛到1895年正式窃占，始终是秘密进行的，从未公开宣示，因此进一步证明其对钓鱼岛的主权主张不具有国际法规定的效力。
 
Japan’s official documents show that from the time of the facts-finding missions to Diaoyu Dao in 1885 to the occupation of the islands in 1895, Japan had consistently acted in secrecy without making its moves public. This further proves that Japan’s claim of sovereignty over Diaoyu Dao does not have legal effect under international law.
 
钓鱼岛随台湾岛被迫割让给日本
Diaoyu Dao was ceded to Japan together with the Taiwan Island
 
1895年4月17日，清朝在甲午战争中战败，被迫与日本签署不平等的《马关条约》，割让“台湾全岛及所有附属各岛屿”。钓鱼岛等作为台湾“附属岛屿”一并被割让给日本。1900年，日本将钓鱼岛改名为“尖阁列岛”。
 
On April 17, 1895, the Qing court was defeated in the Sino-Japanese War and forced to sign the unequal Treaty of Shimonoseki and cede to Japan “the island of Formosa (Taiwan), together with all islands appertaining or belonging to the said island of Formosa”. The Diaoyu Dao Islands were ceded to Japan as “islands appertaining or belonging to the said island of Formosa”. In 1900, Japan changed the name of Diaoyu Dao to “Senkaku Islands”.
美日对钓鱼岛私相授受非法无效
 Backroom Deals Between the United States and Japan Concerning Diaoyu Dao are Illegal and Invalid
 
第二次世界大战后，钓鱼岛回归中国。但20世纪50年代，美国擅自将钓鱼岛纳入其托管范围，70年代美国将钓鱼岛“施政权”“归还”日本。美日对钓鱼岛进行私相授受，严重侵犯了中国的领土主权，是非法的、无效的，没有也不能改变钓鱼岛属于中国的事实。
 
Diaoyu Dao was returned to China after the Second World War. However, the United States arbitrarily included Diaoyu Dao under its trusteeship in the 1950s and “returned” the “power of administration” over Diaoyu Dao to Japan in the 1970s. The backroom deals between the United States and Japan concerning Diaoyu Dao are acts of grave violation of China’s territorial sovereignty. They are illegal and invalid. They have not and cannot change the fact that Diaoyu Dao belongs to China.
 
“二战”后钓鱼岛归还中国
Diaoyu Dao was returned to China after the Second World War
 
1941年12月，中国政府正式对日宣战，宣布废除中日之间的一切条约。1943年12月《开罗宣言》明文规定，“日本所窃取于中国之领土，例如东北四省、台湾、澎湖群岛等，归还中华民国。其他日本以武力或贪欲所攫取之土地，亦务将日本驱逐出境”。1945年7月《波茨坦公告》第八条规定：“《开罗宣言》之条件必将实施，而日本之主权必将限于本州、北海道、九州、四国及吾人所决定之其他小岛。”1945年9月2日，日本政府在《日本投降书》中明确接受《波茨坦公告》，并承诺忠诚履行《波茨坦公告》各项规定。1946年1月29日，《盟军最高司令部训令第677号》明确规定了日本施政权所包括的范围是“日本的四个主要岛屿（北海道、本州、九州、四国）及包括对马诸岛、北纬30度以北的琉球诸岛的约1000个邻近小岛”。1945年10月25日，中国战区台湾省对日受降典礼在台北举行，中国政府正式收复台湾。1972年9月29日，日本政府在《中日联合声明》中郑重承诺，充分理解和尊重中方关于台湾是中国不可分割一部分的立场，并坚持《波茨坦公告》第八条的立场。
 
In December 1941, the Chinese government officially declared war against Japan together with the abrogation of all treaties between China and Japan. In December 1943, the Cairo Declaration stated in explicit terms that “all the territories Japan has stolen from the Chinese, such as Manchuria, Formosa [Taiwan] and the Pescadores, shall be restored to the Republic of China. Japan will also be expelled from all other territories which she has taken by violence and greed.” In July 1945, thePotsdam Proclamation stated in Article 8: “The terms of the Cairo Declaration shall be carried out and Japanese sovereignty shall be limited to the islands of Honshu, Hokkaido, Kyushu, Shikoku and such minor islands as we determine.” On September 2, 1945, the Japanese government accepted the Potsdam Proclamation in explicit terms with the Japanese Instrument of Surrender and pledged to faithfully fulfill the obligations enshrined in the provisions of the Potsdam Proclamation. On January 29, 1946, the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers Instruction (SCAPIN) No.677 clearly defined Japan’s power of administration to “include the four main islands of Japan (Hokkaido, Honshu, Kyushu and Shikoku) and the approximately 1,000 smaller adjacent islands, including the Tsushima Islands and the Ryukyu Islands north of the 30th parallel of North Latitude”. On October 25, 1945, the ceremony for accepting Japan’s surrender in Taiwan Province of the China War Theater was held in Taipei, and the Chinese government officially recovered Taiwan. On September 29, 1972, the Japanese government committed with all seriousness in the China-Japan Joint Statement that “the Government of Japan fully understands and respects this stand of the Government of the People’s Republic of China [Taiwan is an inalienable part of the territory of the People’s Republic of China], and it firmly maintains its stand under Article 8 of the Potsdam Proclamation.”
 
上述事实表明，依据《开罗宣言》、《波茨坦公告》和《日本投降书》，钓鱼岛作为台湾的附属岛屿应与台湾一并归还中国。
 
These facts show that in accordance with the Cairo Declaration, the Potsdam Proclamation and the Japanese Instrument of Surrender, Diaoyu Dao, as affiliated islands of Taiwan, should be returned, together with Taiwan, to China.
 
美国非法将钓鱼岛纳入托管范围
The United States illegally included Diaoyu Dao under its trusteeship
 
1951年9月8日，美国等一些国家在排除中国的情况下，与日本缔结了“旧金山对日和平条约”（简称“旧金山和约”），规定北纬29度以南的西南诸岛等交由联合国托管，而美国为唯一施政当局。需要指出的是，该条约所确定的交由美国托管的西南诸岛并不包括钓鱼岛。
 
On September 8, 1951, Japan, the United States and a number of other countries signed the Treaty of Peace with Japan (commonly known as the Treaty of San Francisco) with China being excluded from it. The treaty placed the Nansei Islands south of the 29th parallel of North Latitude under United Nations’ trusteeship, with the United States as the sole administering authority. It should be pointed out that the Nansei Islands placed under the administration of the United States in the Treaty of Peace with Japan did not include Diaoyu Dao.
 
1952年2月29日、1953年12月25日，琉球列岛美国民政府先后发布第68号令（即《琉球政府章典》）和第27号令（即关于“琉球列岛的地理界限”布告），擅自扩大托管范围，将中国领土钓鱼岛划入其中。此举没有任何法律依据，中国坚决反对。
 
The United States Civil Administration of the Ryukyu Islands (USCAR) issued Civil Administration Ordinance No. 68(Provisions of the Government of the Ryukyu Islands) on February 29, 1952 and Civil Administration Proclamation No. 27(defining the “geographical boundary lines of the Ryukyu Islands”) on December 25, 1953, arbitrarily expanding its jurisdiction to include China’s Diaoyu Dao. However, there were no legal grounds whatsoever for the US act, to which China has firmly opposed.
 
美日私相授受钓鱼岛“施政权”
The United States and Japan conducted backroom deals concerning the “power of administration” over Diaoyu Dao
 
1971年6月17日，美日签署《关于琉球诸岛及大东诸岛的协定》（简称“归还冲绳协定”），将琉球群岛和钓鱼岛的“施政权”“归还”给日本。海内外中国人对此同声谴责。同年12月30日，中国外交部发表严正声明指出：“美、日两国政府在‘归还’冲绳协定中，把我国钓鱼岛等岛屿列入‘归还区域’，完全是非法的，这丝毫不能改变中华人民共和国对钓鱼岛等岛屿的领土主权。”台湾当局对此也表示坚决反对。
 
On June 17, 1971, Japan and the United States signed the Agreement Concerning the Ryukyu Islands and the Daito Islands (Okinawa Reversion Agreement), which provided that any and all powers of administration over the Ryukyu Islands and Diaoyu Dao would be “returned” to Japan. The Chinese people, including overseas Chinese, all condemned such a backroom deal. On December 30, 1971, the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a solemn statement, pointing out that “it is completely illegal for the government of the United States and Japan to include China’s Diaoyu Dao Islands into the territories to be returned to Japan in the Okinawa Reversion Agreement and that it can by no means change the People’s Republic of China’s territorial sovereignty over the Diaoyu Dao Islands”. The Taiwan authorities also expressed firm opposition to the backroom deal between the United States and Japan.
 
面对中国政府和人民的强烈反对，美国不得不公开澄清其在钓鱼岛主权归属问题上的立场。1971年10月，美国政府表示，“把原从日本取得的对这些岛屿的施政权归还给日本，毫不损害有关主权的主张。美国既不能给日本增加在他们将这些岛屿施政权移交给我们之前所拥有的法律权利，也不能因为归还给日本施政权而削弱其他要求者的权利。……对此等岛屿的任何争议的要求均为当事者所应彼此解决的事项”。同年11月，美国参议院批准“归还冲绳协定”时，美国国务院发表声明称，尽管美国将该群岛的施政权交还日本，但是在中日双方对群岛对抗性的领土主张中，美国将采取中立立场，不偏向于争端中的任何一方。
 
In response to the strong opposition of the Chinese government and people, the United States had to publicly clarify its position on the sovereignty over Diaoyu Dao. In October 1971, the US administration stated that “the United States believes that a return of administrative rights over those islands to Japan, from which the rights were received, can in no way prejudice any underlying claims. The United States cannot add to the legal rights Japan possessed before it transferred administration of the islands to us, nor can the United States, by giving back what it received, diminish the rights of other claimants... The United States has made no claim to Diaoyu Dao and considers that any conflicting claims to the islands are a matter for resolution by the parties concerned.” In November 1971, when presenting the Okinawa Reversion Agreement to the US Senate for ratification, the US Department of State stressed that the United States took a neutral position with regard to the competing Japanese and Chinese claims to the islands, despite the return of administrative rights over the islands to Japan.
日本主张钓鱼岛主权毫无依据
 Japan’s Claim of Sovereignty over Diaoyu Dao Is Totally Unfounded
 
1972年3月8日，日本外务省发表《关于尖阁列岛所有权问题的基本见解》，阐述日本政府对于钓鱼岛主权归属问题的主张：一是钓鱼岛为“无主地”，不包含在《马关条约》规定的由清政府割让给日本的澎湖列岛和台湾及其附属岛屿的范围之内。二是钓鱼岛不包含在“旧金山和约”第二条规定的日本所放弃的领土之内，而是包含在该条约第三条规定的作为西南诸岛的一部分被置于美国施政之下，并根据“归还冲绳协定”将施政权“归还”日本的区域内。三是中国没有将钓鱼岛视为台湾的一部分，对“旧金山和约”第三条规定将钓鱼岛置于美国施政区域内从未提出过任何异议。
 
On March 8, 1972, Japan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued the Basic View on the Sovereignty over the Senkaku Islands in an attempt to explain the Japanese government’s claims of sovereignty over Diaoyu Dao. First, Japan claims that Diaoyu Dao was “terra nullius” and not part of Pescadores, Formosa [Taiwan] or their affiliated islands which were ceded to Japan by the Qing government in accordance with the Treaty of Shimonoseki. Second, Japan claims that Diaoyu Dao was not included in the territory which Japan renounced under Article 2 of the Treaty of San Francisco, but was placed under the administration of the United States as part of the Nansei Islands in accordance with Article 3 of the said treaty, and was included in the area for which the administrative rights were reverted to Japan in accordance with the Okinawa Reversion Agreement. Third, Japan claims that China didn’t regard Diaoyu Dao as part of Taiwan and had never challenged the inclusion of the islands in the area over which the United States exercised administrative rights in accordance with Article 3 of theTreaty of San Francisco.
 
日本的上述主张严重违背事实，是完全站不住脚的。
 
Such claims by Japan fly in the face of facts and are totally unfounded.
 
钓鱼岛属于中国，根本不是“无主地”。在日本人“发现”钓鱼岛之前，中国已经对钓鱼岛实施了长达数百年有效管辖，是钓鱼岛无可争辩的主人。如前所述，日本大量官方文件证明，日本完全清楚钓鱼岛早已归属中国，绝非国际法上的无主地。日本所谓依据“先占”原则将钓鱼岛作为“无主地”“编入”其版图，是侵占中国领土的非法行为，不具有国际法效力。
 
Diaoyu Dao belongs to China. It is by no means “terra nullius”. China is the indisputable owner of Diaoyu Dao as it had exercised valid jurisdiction over the island for several hundred years long before the Japanese people “discovered” it. As stated above, voluminous Japanese official documents prove that Japan was fully aware that according to international law, Diaoyu Dao has long been part of China and was not “terra nullius”. Japan’s act to include Diaoyu Dao as “terra nullius” into its territory based on the “occupation” principle is in fact an illegal act of occupying Chinese territory and has no legal effect according to international law.
 
无论从地理上还是从中国历史管辖实践看，钓鱼岛一直是中国台湾岛的附属岛屿。日本通过不平等的《马关条约》迫使清朝割让包括钓鱼岛在内的“台湾全岛及所有附属各岛屿”。《开罗宣言》、《波茨坦公告》等国际法律文件规定，日本必须无条件归还其窃取的中国领土。上述文件还对日本领土范围作了明确界定，其中根本不包括钓鱼岛。日本试图侵占钓鱼岛，实质是对《开罗宣言》和《波茨坦公告》等法律文件所确立的战后国际秩序的挑战，严重违背了日本应承担的国际法义务。
 
Diaoyu Dao has always been affiliated to China’s Taiwan Island both in geographical terms and in accordance with China’s historical jurisdiction practice. Through the unequal Treaty of Shimonoseki, Japan forced the Qing court to cede to it “the island of Taiwan, together with all islands appertaining or belonging to it”, including Diaoyu Dao. International legal documents such as the Cairo Declaration and the Potsdam Proclamation provide that Japan must unconditionally return the territories it has stolen from China. These documents also clearly define Japan’s territory, which by no means includes Diaoyu Dao. Japan’s attempted occupation of Diaoyu Dao, in essence, constitutes a challenge to the post-war international order established by such legal documents as the Cairo Declaration and the Potsdam Proclamation and seriously violates the obligations Japan should undertake according to international law.
 
美国等国家与日本签订的片面媾和条约“旧金山和约”所规定的托管范围不涵盖钓鱼岛。美国擅自扩大托管范围，非法将中国领土钓鱼岛纳入其中，后将钓鱼岛“施政权”“归还”日本，都没有任何法律依据，在国际法上没有任何效力。对于美日上述非法行径，中国政府和人民历来是明确反对的。
 
Diaoyu Dao was not placed under the trusteeship established by the Treaty of San Francisco, which was signed between the United States and other countries with Japan and is partial in nature. The United States arbitrarily expanded the scope of trusteeship to include Diaoyu Dao, which is China’s territory, and later “returned” the “power of administration” over Diaoyu Dao to Japan. This has no legal basis and is totally invalid according to international law. The government and people of China have always explicitly opposed such illegal acts of the United States and Japan.
中国为维护钓鱼岛主权进行坚决斗争
 China has Taken Resolute Measures to Safeguard its Sovereignty over Diaoyu Dao
 
长期以来，中国为维护钓鱼岛的主权进行了坚决斗争。
 
China has, over the past years, taken resolute measures to safeguard its sovereignty over Diaoyu Dao.
 
中国通过外交途径强烈抗议和谴责美日私相授受钓鱼岛。1951年8月15日，旧金山会议召开前，中国政府声明：“对日和约的准备、拟制和签订，如果没有中华人民共和国的参加，无论其内容和结果如何，中央人民政府一概认为是非法的，因而也是无效的。”1951年9月18日，中国政府再次声明，强调“旧金山和约”是非法无效的，绝对不能承认。1971年，针对美、日两国国会先后批准“归还冲绳协定”的行为，中国外交部严正声明，钓鱼岛等岛屿自古以来就是中国领土不可分割的一部分。
 
China has, through the diplomatic channel, strongly protested against and condemned the backroom deals between the United States and Japan over Diaoyu Dao. On August 15, 1951, before the San Francisco Conference, the Chinese government made a statement: “If the People’s Republic of China is excluded from the preparation, formulation and signing of the peace treaty with Japan, it will, no matter what its content and outcome are, be regarded as illegal and therefore invalid by the central people’s government.” On September 18, 1951, the Chinese government issued another statement stressing that the Treaty of San Francisco is illegal and invalid and can under no circumstances be recognized. In 1971, responding to the ratifications of the Okinawa Reversion Agreement by the US Congress and Japanese Diet, the Chinese Foreign Ministry issued a stern statement which pointed out that the Diaoyu Dao Islands have been an indivisible part of the Chinese territory since ancient times.
 
针对日本侵犯中国钓鱼岛主权的非法行径，中国政府采取积极有力措施，通过发表外交声明、对日严正交涉和向联合国提交反对照会等举措表示抗议，郑重宣示中国的一贯主张和原则立场，坚决捍卫中国的领土主权和海洋权益，切实维护中国公民的人身和财产安全。
 
In response to Japan’s illegal violation of China’s sovereignty over Diaoyu Dao, the Chinese government has taken active and forceful measures such as issuing diplomatic statements, making serious representations with Japan and submitting notes of protest to the United Nations, solemnly stating China’s consistent proposition, principle and position, firmly upholding China’s territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests, and earnestly protecting the safety of life and property of Chinese citizens.
 
中国通过国内立法明确规定钓鱼岛属于中国。1958年，中国政府发表领海声明，宣布台湾及其周围各岛属于中国。针对日本自20世纪70年代以来对钓鱼岛所采取的种种侵权行为，中国于1992年颁布《中华人民共和国领海及毗连区法》时，明确规定“台湾及其包括钓鱼岛在内的附属各岛”属于中国领土。2009年颁布的《中华人民共和国海岛保护法》确立了海岛保护开发和管理制度，对海岛名称的确定和发布作了规定，据此，中国于2012年3月公布了钓鱼岛及其部分附属岛屿的标准名称。2012年9月10日，中国政府发表声明，公布了钓鱼岛及其附属岛屿的领海基线。9月13日，中国政府向联合国秘书长交存钓鱼岛及其附属岛屿领海基点基线的坐标表和海图。
 
China has enacted domestic laws, which clearly provide that Diaoyu Dao belongs to China. In 1958, the Chinese government released a statement on the territorial sea, announcing that Taiwan and its adjacent islands belong to China. In light of Japan’s repeated violations of China’s sovereignty over Diaoyu Dao since the 1970s, China adopted the Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone in 1992, which unequivocally prescribes that “Taiwan and the various affiliated islands including Diaoyu Dao” belong to China. The 2009 Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of Offshore Islands establishes the protection, development and management system of offshore islands and prescribes the determination and announcement of the names of offshore islands, on the basis of which China announced the standard names of Diaoyu Dao and some of its affiliated islands in March 2012. On September 10, 2012, the Chinese government issued a statement announcing the baselines of the territorial sea of Diaoyu Dao and its affiliated islands. On September 13, the Chinese government deposited the coordinates table and chart of the base points and baselines of the territorial sea of Diaoyu Dao and its affiliated islands with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
 
中国始终在钓鱼岛海域保持经常性的存在，并进行管辖。中国海监执法船在钓鱼岛海域坚持巡航执法，渔政执法船在钓鱼岛海域进行常态化执法巡航和护渔，维护该海域正常的渔业生产秩序。中国还通过发布天气和海洋观测预报等，对钓鱼岛及其附近海域实施管理。
 
China has maintained routine presence and exercised jurisdiction in the waters of Diaoyu Dao. China’s marine surveillance vessels have been carrying out law enforcement patrol missions in the waters of Diaoyu Dao, and fishery administration law enforcement vessels have been conducting regular law enforcement patrols and fishery protection missions to uphold normal fishing order in the waters of Diaoyu Dao. China has also exercised administration over Diaoyu Dao and the adjacent waters by releasing weather forecasts and through oceanographic monitoring and forecasting.
 
一直以来，钓鱼岛问题受到港澳同胞、台湾同胞和海外侨胞的共同关注。钓鱼岛自古以来就是中国的固有领土，这是全体中华儿女的共同立场。中华民族在维护国家主权和领土完整问题上有着坚定的决心。两岸同胞在民族大义面前，在共同维护民族利益和尊严方面，是一致的。港澳台同胞和海内外广大华侨华人纷纷开展各种形式的活动，维护钓鱼岛领土主权，强烈表达了中华儿女的正义立场，向世界展示了中华民族爱好和平、维护国家主权、捍卫领土完整的决心和意志。
 
Over the years, the issue of Diaoyu Dao has attracted attention from Hong Kong and Macao compatriots, Taiwan compatriots and overseas Chinese. Diaoyu Dao has been an inherent territory of China since ancient times. This is the common position of the entire Chinese nation. The Chinese nation has the strong resolve to uphold state sovereignty and territorial integrity. The compatriots across the Taiwan Straits stand firmly together on matters of principle to the nation and in the efforts to uphold national interests and dignity. The compatriots from Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan and the overseas Chinese have all carried out various forms of activities to safeguard China’s territorial sovereignty over Diaoyu Dao, strongly expressing the just position of the Chinese nation, and displaying to the rest of the world that the peace-loving Chinese nation has the determination and the will to uphold China’s state sovereignty and territorial integrity.
结束语
Conclusion
 
钓鱼岛自古以来就是中国的固有领土，中国对其拥有无可争辩的主权。
Diaoyu Dao has been an inherent territory of China since ancient times, and China has indisputable sovereignty over Diaoyu Dao.
20世纪70年代，中日在实现邦交正常化和缔结《中日和平友好条约》时，两国老一辈领导人着眼两国关系大局，就将“钓鱼岛问题放一放，留待以后解决”达成谅解和共识。但近年来，日本不断对钓鱼岛采取单方面举措，特别是对钓鱼岛实施所谓“国有化”，严重侵犯中国主权，背离中日两国老一辈领导人达成的谅解和共识。这不但严重损害了中日关系，也是对世界反法西斯战争胜利成果的否定和挑战。
 
 As China and Japan were normalizing relations and concluding the Sino-Japanese Treaty of Peace and Friendship in the 1970s, the then leaders of the two countries, acting in the larger interest of China-Japan relations, reached important understanding and consensus on “leaving the issue of Diaoyu Dao to be resolved later.” But in recent years, Japan has repeatedly taken unilateral measures concerning Diaoyu Dao and conducted in particular the so-called “nationalization” of Diaoyu Dao. This severely infringed upon China’s sovereignty and ran counter to the understanding and consensus reached between the older generation of leaders of the two countries. It has not only seriously damaged China-Japan relations, but also rejected and challenged the outcomes of the victory of the World Anti-Fascist War.
 
中国强烈敦促日本尊重历史和国际法，立即停止一切损害中国领土主权的行为。
China strongly urges Japan to respect history and international law and immediately stop all actions that undermine China’s territorial sovereignty.
中国政府捍卫国家领土主权的决心和意志是坚定不移的，有信心、有能力捍卫国家主权，维护领土完整。
The Chinese government has the unshakable resolve and will to uphold the nation’s territorial sovereignty. It has the confidence and ability to safeguard China’s state sovereignty and territorial integrity.

